A Short List of Aviation’s Most Vexing Disappearances
Investigators examining the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 more than four years ago completed their inquiry on Monday without definitive conclusions on the cause. The flight, carrying 239 people from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to Beijing on March 8, 2014, vanished after having inexplicably veered off course.
The unsolved mystery has added Flight 370 to aviation history’s most vexing disappearances and unexplained crashes. Here are some others:
Amelia Earhart vanished during her attempt to become the first woman to pilot a plane around the world in the late 1930s, a case that continues to fascinate.
Ms. Earhart and her navigator, Fred Noonan, took off from Lae, New Guinea, in a Lockheed Electra on July 2, 1937, bound for Howland Island about 1,900 miles southwest of Honolulu. A news agency report suggested their fuel had run low. More than 80 years later, the pair’s fate remains unknown.

In March 1962, Flying Tiger Line Flight 739 from Agana Naval Air Station in Guam to Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines carrying 107 people, including 93 American soldiers, went missing. No wreckage was found. More than 50 planes and vessels searched 75,000 square miles between Guam and the Philippines.
In November 1957, a Pan Am flight carrying 36 passengers and eight crew members went missing after departing from San Francisco. Known as the “Romance of the Skies,” the Boeing 377 Stratocruiser, a long-range airliner based on the B-29 Bomber, had been heading to Honolulu, the first stop in its planned circumnavigation of the globe. A little more than five hours into the flight, contact was lost. Some debris and 19 bodies were recovered about a week later. Investigators said they could not determine the cause.
On Oct. 31, 1999, EgyptAir Flight 990 en route from New York’s Kennedy Airport to Cairo crashed into the Atlantic southeast of Nantucket Island 33 minutes after takeoff, killing all 217 on board. The National Transportation Safety Board attributed the cause to a co-pilot’s “manipulation of the airplane controls,” suggesting that it was deliberate. The cockpit voice recorder captured the first officer repeating the phrase, in Arabic, “I rely on God.” The Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority disputed the report and faulted American investigators for not considering what it called a “credible body of evidence” suggesting mechanical failure.
On May 25, 2003, a Boeing 727 cargo plane that had once belonged to American Airlines mysteriously departed from Luanda, Angola, without permission. Who was aboard the plane, and its destination, were never determined. According to an article in Air & Space Magazine,  an American citizen, Ben Charles Padilla, an aircraft mechanic working in Angola, may have been at the controls. The F.B.I. sought information about Mr. Padilla but never found him, and the plane’s fate remains a mystery.
