Congo, on Verge of Landmark Election, Pulls Back Again
The promises had been made before, and many in the Democratic Republic of Congo expected them to be broken again: President Joseph Kabila would step down at last, and there would be a free election to choose a new leader. But on Thursday, the electoral commission postponed the vote for a week.
Three days before the long-anticipated election set for Sunday, the commission told presidential candidates that it was “technically incapable” of holding the vote that would have seen Mr. Kabila leave office after almost 18 years in power.
Time and again, the commission has delayed the election. This time, it blamed violence, technical problems — including a mysterious fire that incinerated thousands of voting machines last week — and an Ebola epidemic ravaging parts of eastern Congo.
The election was supposed to be held in 2016. But it was postponed until this year, when Mr. Kabila appeared to bend to international and regional pressure as well as street protests led by the Roman Catholic Church, one of the few institutions in the country that enjoys widespread legitimacy.
Violence flared this week, with more than 100 people killed in election-related clashes. There are now worries of greater instability, as people grow more frustrated with the delays and with the president, who last week let slip that he would stay in charge of the country even if he were no longer officially the president.
Many Congolese had predicted that even if the election went ahead on Sunday, the government would manipulate the results in favor of Mr. Kabila’s handpicked successor, Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary, a former interior minister whose name carries little resonance among the country’s 40 million voters.
The vote was also supposed to include provincial and legislative elections.
The government appears to be struggling to maintain a veneer of credibility in the face of massive support for the opposition, analysts said.
Huge crowds have welcomed the main opposition candidate, Martin Fayulu, a former Exxon manager who has the support of a pair of prominent Congolese personalities, Moise Katumbi and Jean-Pierre Bemba. Both have been barred from running because of their popularity. (Mr. Katumbi owns Congo’s most popular soccer team.)
During a campaign rally for Mr. Fayulu this week, security forces reportedly used tear-gas and live bullets against supporters, according to rights activists. At least three people were killed, according to the activists and news reports.
On Wednesday, the governor of the Kinshasa region banned all public rallies in the capital, a move that was viewed as an attempt to hamper Mr. Fayulu from campaigning.
“Since the masks are falling off, we are discovering finally the real aim of the regime in,” said a statement by the opposition coalition which included Mr. Fayulu among the signatories. “That is, to stay in power to continue pillaging the country and to kill, with impunity, the Congolese population that profoundly aspires for change.”
When the election delay was announced, shopkeepers were shuttering their stalls in broad daylight at a major marketplace in Kinshasa in anticipation of potential outbreaks of violence. LUCHA, a prominent urban youth organization that is critical of the government, called for demonstrations to protest the delay.
Corneille Nangaa, the head of the electoral commission, told Western journalists a couple of weeks ago that the election would go on despite the Ebola crisis and insecurity. He insisted that the voting machines, 100,000 large electronic tablets made in South Korea, were foolproof.
But the United States and the European Union have expressed concern about the machines, saying they were untested and vulnerable to fraud. Given the scarcity of electricity in parts of Congo, a sprawling tropical country in central Africa with more than 80 million people, there have also been worries that large parts of the population could be disenfranchised.
“Five million ballot papers had to be ordered” following the fire that destroyed some of the machines, Mr. Nangaa said at a news conference on Thursday. One million were delivered on Wednesday. The rest would not arrive until Saturday evening, and it will two to three days to distribute them, he said.
In a recent interview with The New York Times, Mr. Kabila insisted that he would accept an opposition victory, but his critics are skeptical.
“The Kabila regime cannot in any way allow the election of Fayulu because of his radicality and because he has the support of Katumbi, Kabila’s sworn enemy,” said Israel Mutala, a political consultant in Kinshasa.
In agreeing to hold an election, though, the government rejected international funds, saying the conditions required by the donors amounted to “foreign interference.” Instead, the government insisted it could pay for the balloting, thought to cost at least $1 billion, by dipping into profits from the country’s mining industry.
The government also rejected other forms of aid, including some electoral observers, and even a United Nations proposal to use its helicopters and planes to transport voting machines to polling stations nationwide.
