German Comedian Is Told Not to Repeat Lewd Lines About Erdogan
BERLIN — Jan Böhmermann, a German television comedian whose lewd poem satirizing Turkey’s president stirred tensions between the countries and a furor over freedom of expression, is back on the air and will not face criminal charges.
But he is still forbidden from publicly repeating most of the poem, which made provocative — and, his critics say, outrageous — insinuations about the sexuality, behavior and intelligence of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
On Friday, a civil court in Hamburg, upholding a ruling from May, barred Mr. Böhmermann from repeating 18 of the 24 lines from the poem.
Mr. Erdogan tried last year to have Mr. Böhmermann criminally prosecuted, with help from Germany’s government, under an 1871 law that forbids Germans from insulting heads of state.
In October, prosecutors in the city of Mainz dropped the criminal charges, deciding that Mr. Böhmermann’s satirical poem was merely hyperbole in the name of art and finding no evidence of criminal intent. But that ruling did not affect a separate civil proceeding brought in Hamburg on behalf of Mr. Erdogan, who sought to prohibit circulation of the poem.
A court in Hamburg issued an injunction in May forbidding Mr. Böhmermann from repeating parts of the poem, but the comedian refused to issue a declaration that he would cease and desist, so the case went back to a lower court, which heard arguments and ruled on Friday.
Mr. Böhmermann’s lawyer, Christian Schertz, said in a statement from his office in Berlin that the decision was predictable but that Mr. Böhmermann would file an appeal — to a higher court in Hamburg and then, if necessary, to the Federal Court of Justice. Some of his supporters hope the case will end up before the higher court, in the hopes that the court would set a precedent affirming freedom of speech.
The Hamburg court “again did not sufficiently consider artistic freedom, in particular how the poem was embedded in a whole context,” Mr. Schertz said.
Lawyers for Mr. Erdogan, who sought a complete injunction on the poem and has cracked down on insults at home, previously said they, too, would pursue their case in further court hearings.
The furor began last year on March 31, when Mr. Böhmermann recited his poem on television, after Mr. Erdogan had expressed outrage at another German video lampooning him.
The lewd poem caused an international dispute, and at one point it appeared to jeopardize a major deal between Turkey and the European Union to curb the flow of migrants entering Europe. The comedian was placed under police protection for a short time and was off television for several weeks.
His regular weekly show has long been back on the air, albeit with no mention of Turkey. Last week, when receiving a major television award, Mr. Böhmermann dedicated it to lawyers for ZDF, the public broadcaster that airs his show.
Germany has moved to repeal the law that protects foreign leaders from critical speech, a process that is expected to be completed this year.
