Philippine Supreme Court Upholds Duterte’s Martial Law Edict
MANILA — The Philippine Supreme Court upheld on Tuesday President Rodrigo Duterte’s declaration of martial law in the southern Philippines, which he says is needed to crush an uprising by militants linked to the Islamic State.
The court dismissed challenges to the order Mr. Duterte issued on May 23, days after militants launched attacks aimed at taking over the southern city of Marawi, where fighting still continues. The edict gives the military widespread powers not just in Marawi but across the large southern island of Mindanao, including carrying out warrantless arrests and setting up roadblocks and checkpoints.
Mr. Duterte had said Saturday that he would ignore the court if it struck down the order. Eleven of the 14 justices voted to uphold it, Ted Te, a spokesman for the court, said Tuesday. One said it was unconstitutional, and the three others said it should be limited to Marawi, Mr. Te said.
The government’s chief lawyer, Jose Calida, said the ruling “underscores the existence of real and present rebellion that threatens the lives of our fellow Filipinos in Mindanao, and their much-cherished liberties.”
“As the conscience of our nation, the Supreme Court did not sit idly to watch our country get dismembered,” Mr. Cadila, the solicitor general, said in a statement. “In fact, this decision shows the honorable Supreme Court is one with the president in protecting and defending our country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.”
Critics of Mr. Duterte have called his edict a throwback to the days of Ferdinand Marcos, the strongman under whose two-decade rule thousands of dissidents were killed or went missing. Protesters outside the Supreme Court on Tuesday said Mr. Duterte was adopting the dictatorial methods of Mr. Marcos, for whom the president has expressed admiration.
Julkipli Wadi, a political-science professor and head of the Institute of Islamic Studies at the University of the Philippines, said the ruling gave credence to critics’ fears that martial law would spread beyond Mindanao, given that both the government and the militants have predicted that Islamic State-inspired radicalism would rise.
“It will certainly boost Duterte’s draconian rule in Mindanao,” Mr. Wadi said of the ruling.
Mr. Duterte has said that he might declare martial law throughout the Philippines if Islamist rebels gain footholds elsewhere in the country.
The military is still struggling to retake Marawi from Islamic State-inspired gunmen with the Philippine militant groups Abu Sayyaf and Maute, backed by fighters from the Middle East and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. Most of the 200,000 residents in the predominantly Muslim city have fled, and the intense fighting has killed 85 soldiers, 39 civilians and 337 rebels, according to the military.
On the eve of the court’s ruling, Mr. Duterte gave a rare televised speech in which he rallied the troops fighting in Marawi and thanked them for their “relentless effort.”
“I enjoin the operating troops to carry on until our objective of wiping out these enemies of the state and the people has been achieved,” he said. He said martial law in Mindanao “will remain in effect to counter the persistent threat of terrorism and insurgency.”
Mr. Duterte had said on Saturday that he would reject the ruling if the court struck down his edict, saying he would listen only to the armed forces.
“It’s not dependent on the whim of the Supreme Court,” he said. “Should I believe them? When I see the situation is still chaotic and you ask me to lift it? I will arrest you and put you behind bars.”
The martial law declaration has strong support in Congress, which is dominated by Mr. Duterte’s allies. Richard Javad Heydarian, a political-science professor at De La Salle University in Manila, said the court was likely to have been influenced by the two elected branches of government.
“Clearly, the Supreme Court is making decisions not irrespective of the broader political atmosphere,” Mr. Heydarian said.
