Gang Attacks Pakistani Journalist Critical of Military
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — A prominent journalist and critic of Pakistan’s military was attacked on Friday by an unidentified group of men in the capital, Islamabad, leaving him gravely wounded.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the brazen, daylight attack, which sent a chill through the country’s community of journalists. The reporter, Ahmad Noorani, is well known for his critical views of Pakistan’s powerful military and intelligence agencies.
Mr. Noorani worked for The News, one of the country’s most influential newspapers, and regularly wrote about the military’s outsize influence in Pakistani politics. As a result of his reporting, he had recently come under a series of threats.
In an effort to protect himself, this year he moved from his home in Rawalpindi to Islamabad, and this month he deactivated his Twitter account.
On Friday morning, Mr. Noorani was heading home after running an errand when his car was followed by men on motorcycles brandishing weapons, said Azaz Syed, a friend and colleague. At least six unidentified men dragged the reporter from his car, Mr. Syed said.
“They dragged Noorani out of the vehicle and beat him with iron knuckles, knives and iron chains,” Mr. Syed said. Mr. Noorani’s driver was also beaten. The attackers fled after a crowd started gathering and traffic came to a halt. Mr. Noorani was taken to a hospital where he was placed in the intensive care unit. His condition was stable, Mr. Syed said.
The police said they were investigating the attack.
Mr. Noorani has written extensively about a military intelligence investigation that led to the ouster of Nawaz Sharif as prime minister in July. The military has denied any role in removing Mr. Sharif, but members of his Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz Party have repeatedly alluded to a conspiracy.
Mr. Noorani had also accused the leadership of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, an opposition political party led by Imran Khan, of financial impropriety. Mr. Khan condemned the attack on Mr. Noorani in a Twitter post, but many of his supporters praised the assault on social media.
Pakistan is considered one of the world’s most dangerous countries for journalists, who face threats from both the military and militant groups. In 2014, Hamid Mir, a prominent journalist and talk show host, survived an attempt on his life. In 2011, another leading investigative journalist, Syed Saleem Shahzad, was found dead, leading to accusations that the intelligence agency was involved.
Journalists in the restive provinces of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa and Baluchistan have also raised concerns about their safety. On Friday, the newspaper Dawn carried an editorial detailing the most recent threats to journalists in Baluchistan.
Geo News, a news network owned by the same group that owns The News, has repeatedly come under pressure because of its critical coverage of the military and its support for the civilian government. Its transmission in cantonment areas — permanent military bases — has been blocked for the past four years, according to officials at the network.
“I feel Pakistani journalists have been under increasing threat going all the way back to the Hamid Mir episode,” said Zebunnisa Burki, an editor at The News. Journalists’ safety and freedom of the press have not been upheld by the government, she said.
“The difference between then and now, though, is the mushroom growth of media organizations willing to muddy the waters by either playing right into the hands of the suppressors or, in some glaring cases, becoming their mouthpieces,” Ms. Burki said.
No investigation into an attack on journalists, when the intelligence agencies are suspected, has ever been solved.
“Who does one turn to when those who are supposed to help you seem even more powerless than the press at times?” Ms. Burki asked.
Separately on Friday, at least two people, including a nationalist politician, were killed in two distinct bombing attacks in Baluchistan.
