Russian Journalist Stabbed, Renewing Fears of Attacks on Media
MOSCOW — Russia’s most prominent talk-radio station, Echo of Moscow, came under attack on Monday when a knife-wielding man broke into the studio and stabbed an announcer in the throat, renewing worries about the safety of journalists here.
The attack splattered blood around the station’s green room, where guests wait to take part in programs. The announcer who was stabbed, Tatyana Felgenhauer, is also the station’s deputy editor and was not on air during the attack, after which security guards tackled and detained the man.
Echo of Moscow is among the dwindling number of news media outlets in Russia that report on a range of political views, including those critical of the government. That has put the station in a crucible of political pressure. Its journalists often receive death threats, and the broadcaster’s editor, Aleksei Venediktov, once opened his apartment door to find a grim warning — a block of wood with an ax lodged in it.
The station’s green room is decorated with a cardboard cutout of Mr. Venediktov, and has been a much-frequented spot for dozens of liberal commentators and politicians in the capital.
Ms. Felgenhauer was in critical condition in a Moscow hospital but her life was not at risk, the radio station reported. It said the assailant, a short man in his 40s, “saw Tatyana Felgenhauer and threw himself at her” without explanation.
Police questioned the man but did not comment on possible motives.
The attack immediately touched off social media posts suggesting a political motivation, though other possibilities were also discussed.
Two Russian news agencies, Interfax and RIA Novosti, cited unidentified police sources suggesting an unspecified “personal” motivation behind the attack. “The main version now is hooliganism,” Interfax reported. Other Russian news media, citing online posts possibly written by the attacker, said the man was deranged and may have become fixated on Ms. Felgenhauer for sexual reasons.
Still, the attack took place amid escalating pressure on the station. One commentator, Yulia Latynina, recently left Russia after unidentified assailants splattered her with feces as she walked on a sidewalk.
This month, Russian state television singled out Ms. Felgenhauer in a report critical of what it called Echo of Moscow’s role “attempting to form pro-Western positions” in Russian society. “The selection of experts and the layout of informational and political material speaks for itself,” the state TV said.
That broadcast on Oct. 11, called “Echo of the State Department,” said the station collaborated with foreign-funded nongovernmental organizations and was “carrying out anti-government policies, in essence.”
In Russia, such politically hued screeds on state TV often set the tone for action by prosecutors or proxy organizations, although there was no indication that the assailant who attacked Ms. Felgenhauer belonged to any such group.
