Thailand Prepares for a King’s $90 Million Cremation Ceremony
BANGKOK — Capping a year of national mourning, Thailand will cremate its celebrated King Bhumibol Adulyadej on Thursday evening, in a $90 million ceremony that symbolizes both the bountiful devotion of his subjects and the earthly abundance of what many consider the world’s wealthiest monarchy.
After 10 months of construction, a 164-foot-high royal pyre and pavilion — decorated with nine gilded spires, a great white umbrella and statuary of the king’s favorite pet dogs — awaits the funerary urn and coffin in which the ninth monarch of the Chakri dynasty has been placed.
At the time of his death at age 88 on Oct. 13, 2016, King Bhumibol, also known as Rama IX, was the world’s longest-reigning royal — and one of the most revered. During his seven decades on the throne, he helped guide a nation prone to chronic coup-making and spasms of political violence.
The cremation, which will begin at 10 p.m. in central Bangkok, is considered the concluding chapter in a journey that will return the divine monarch to the mystical Mount Meru, the heavenly heart of the Buddhist and Hindu realm.
The royal pyre will be ignited by his son, King Maha Vajiralongkorn Bodindradebayavarangkun, whose official coronation is expected to follow soon after his father’s cremation.
Royal palanquins and a golden chariot have been prepared for the five-day cremation ceremony, which weaves together 600-year-old spiritual traditions. On Friday, the king’s ashes and bones will be transported to the Grand Palace and the Temple of the Emerald Buddha.
In Bangkok, residents have folded more than 10 million flowers made of sandalwood, whose scent is believed to guide souls to the afterworld.
Near the Grand Palace, tens of thousands of Thai mourners lined up on Wednesday to secure their spot close to the grounds of the cremation complex, despite monsoonal downpours.
“The long journey and severe weather were not obstacles for me,” said Sittichai Chumwangwapee, a teacher from northeastern Thailand. “The king went to many places and through many more difficulties than this. So, compared to what our late king had to go through, this does not even represent one tiny bit of the tiredness His Majesty King Bhumibol experienced during his work.”
A quarter of a million people are expected to crowd the areas surrounding the funerary grounds, while others can gather at 85 replica cremation pavilions set up across the country. On Thursday, every Thai television channel will broadcast the ceremony live.
In a sign of the event’s solemnity, selfies have been discouraged at the cremation complex.
“Even if it is already a year since his passing, I’m still crying,” said Amornrat Werakan, 57, a business owner who had arrived from central Thailand on Wednesday to try to witness the cremation procession. “This is a very significant loss, like losing the most important person in my life.”
Since King Bhumibol’s death, millions of Thais have limited their wardrobes to black and white. With his impending cremation, Thai websites and television stations also stripped color from their content and programming.
King Bhumibol’s portrait, bespectacled and sober, hangs in most public spaces and private homes. Shopping malls have been playing jazz compositions by the monarch, a keen saxophonist.
The last time Thailand sent off a monarch to Mount Meru was in 1950, after the deceased king’s elder brother, Ananda Mahidol, died by gunshot in the palace four years earlier. The country, once known as Siam, had only recently been named Thailand and was still a tropical backwater of rice paddies and canals.
Today, Thailand ranks as a regional manufacturing hub and global tourism destination. Over the past year, however, its export-led economy has suffered a drop in consumer spending because of the national mourning period.
While King Bhumibol’s long reign was viewed as a steadying influence during an era when the country cycled through 30 prime ministers, his cremation comes at a time of political uncertainty in Thailand.
His 65-year-old son, a thrice-married pilot who has spent significant time abroad, cannot rely on the kind of devotion that King Bhumibol received.
In 2014, a military junta commanded by Prayuth Chan-ocha, now Thailand’s prime minister, toppled a democratically elected government led by forces loyal to a populist politician, Thaksin Shinawatra. The country has cleaved politically between a royalist elite from Bangkok and a rural populace that has suffered from Thailand’s widening income gap. Dozens have died in political violence.
Though Mr. Prayuth has promised elections next year, there is no sign that the political system designed by the military, which mandates an unelected senate and has marginalized pro-Thaksin politicians, will bridge the divide. In every nationwide poll since 2001, the electorate has handed victories to parties aligned with Mr. Thaksin, a onetime telecommunications billionaire.
The enduring political crisis in Thailand mirrors a rollback of democracy throughout much of Southeast Asia, where strongman rule and military power have resurged.
Still, some say wider change could come in Thailand.
“Anxieties have been building up since the twilight of the king’s reign but have been kept under the lid during the royal transition and year of mourning,” said Thitinan Pongsudhirak, a political scientist at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok.
“Thailand’s military government will become untenable after the cremation and as the new reign begins in earnest,” he added. “The pendulum is likely to shift back to representative government.”
King Bhumibol’s reign marked Thailand’s emergence as a modern nation. Already, a nationalist dictator, Field Marshal Phibun Songkhram, had ordered Thais to wear Western clothes and banned the traditional chewing of betel nut, which stains mouths and teeth crimson.
During the Vietnam War, the West depended on Thailand as a military operational base and bulwark against a rising tide of communism in the region. As a result, the Thai generals’ habit of subverting electoral politics through coups never elicited too much international criticism.
While King Bhumibol was said to hover impartially above politics, both putsch-makers and democratically elected leaders needed him to sanctify their time in office. The public became accustomed to images of generals and politicians prostrating themselves in front of their constitutional monarch.
Concerned about rising consumerism, King Bhumibol preached an ascetic lifestyle, even as the crown oversaw a property business that reaped billions of dollars from its ownership of prime Bangkok land, among other ventures.
The deceased king’s signature development philosophy was called “sufficiency economy,” and it married support for various agrarian enterprises with a sense of financial prudence.
King Maha Vajiralongkorn has not pursued such projects.
Criticism of the royal family and royal institution is a serious offense in Thailand, and the number of such lèse-majesté cases has multiplied since the country returned to military rule three years ago. The army has presented itself as the foremost guardian of the Thai monarchy.
One of those charged with lèse-majesté is Sulak Sivaraksa, an 84-year-old social critic and Buddhist campaigner. In 2014, Mr. Sulak questioned the details of a 16th-century elephant battle between a Thai king and a Burmese crown prince. On Oct. 9, he was charged in a military court with insulting one of King Bhumibol’s ancestors. He faces up to 15 years in jail.
“When the government and military are insecure, they think the best way is to lock people up,” Mr. Sulak said. “Then they divert people’s attentions with all this decoration and ceremony. Is this what our monarchy is for?”
