Mattis Resignation and Afghan News Alarm U.S. Allies
President Trump’s decision to withdraw roughly 7,000 troops from Afghanistan, along with the resignation of his defense secretary, Jim Mattis, stirred fears in the Asia-Pacific region on Friday that the United States was abandoning its leadership of decades-old alliances crucial to stability and peace since World War II.
The surprise announcements came after President Trump said he was pulling American forces out of Syria, a decision that prompted Mr. Mattis to resign with a statement about the need to “treat allies with respect and also being clear eyed” about potential enemies.
In Afghanistan, Mr. Mattis was seen as the reliable conduit to the American government, and someone who provided balance to the whims of an often unpredictable president.
But the developments drew particular alarm in Australia, a close American ally whose soldiers have died in American-led wars in Vietnam, Korea, Iraq and Afghanistan.
A senator with the governing Liberal Party, Jim Molan, said the news meant that going forward, “Australia must be self-reliant in its defense.”
“The implications on Australia are the United States — whose military capability now has been severely reduced since the end of the Cold War — now has introduced another extreme variable into their decision-making and that must be of deep concern to Australia,” Mr. Molan told The Australian newspaper.
Mr. Mattis’s resignation — to take effect in February — reignited concerns in Australia about whether the United States could be depended on as an ally. The countries are part of the “Five Eyes” group, also including New Zealand, Britain and Canada, which share intelligence on strategic matters.
“I had a discussion with a senior government official this morning and he asked, ‘Who’s left in the U.S. cabinet who we regard as an adult?’ We both scratched our heads,” said Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute and a former government defense strategist.
The news drew concerns about how Washington would treat sensitive issues in the Asia-Pacific, particularly with the challenge from China, Mr. Jennings said.
“Mattis offered a consistent approach to pushing back against China,” he said. “With Trump everything is negotiable, everything is up in the air.”
Australia has been ramping up its military spending in recent years without explicitly saying it needed to be self-reliant on military matters, but its direction toward more self-sufficiency in terms of its defense has been clear, particularly as China asserts itself in the region.
The news of the planned troop withdrawal in Afghanistan took officials in that country particularly by surprise, with one saying “nothing was communicated,” though Afghan officials were aware of a potential pullout.
A Japanese official, however, expressed confidence that the country’s military alliance with the United States would remain strong given Mr. Trump’s close personal relationship with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
Although Mr. Mattis was a key voice in the administration opposed to pre-emptively attacking North Korea in 2017, the Japanese official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said he was confident that such proposals were unlikely to be revived any time soon.
In China, the country’s military viewed Mr. Mattis as a hard-liner, and the architect of a containment strategy designed to thwart the country’s growing naval reach into the Asia-Pacific region.
To demonstrate American support for Taiwan, the self-governing island that China claims as its territory, Mr. Mattis dispatched warships to the Taiwan Strait three times this year. And Mr. Mattis has pushed back hard against China in the South China Sea, sending warships close to disputed islands that China claims as its own.
A new defense secretary who was more in line with Mr. Trump’s thinking could be an opportunity for China, said Wu Xinbo, director of the Center for American Studies at Fudan University.
Under Mr. Mattis, the Pentagon appeared to act “separately from the Trump team in dealing with China,” Mr. Wu said. Now that could change.
“Certainly Trump wants a more compliant secretary of defense,” said Mr. Wu. “With China Trump, focuses on the economy, not security or geopolitics. But the military has been pushing vigorously on Taiwan and the South China Sea. Let’s see if this will change.”
