Former Thai Leader Yingluck Said to Have Fled Country After Failing to Appear for Verdict
BANGKOK — A former prime minister of Thailand, Yingluck Shinawatra, has fled the country, a senior member of her party said on Friday, and the Supreme Court issued an arrest warrant after she failed to appear in court.
A lawyer for Ms. Yingluck, who could face a prison sentence of up to 10 years if found guilty, informed the court on Friday morning that she had been too ill to attend the reading of the verdict in her case.
But, in fact, she left Thailand, initially for Singapore, on Wednesday evening, according to the senior member of the Phue Thai Party, who declined to be identified because he was not authorized to speak on her behalf. He said he was uncertain whether she had remained in Singapore.
Ms. Yingluck’s lawyer, Norawit Larlaeng, told reporters outside the courthouse that he had learned of her illness only an hour before the hearing.
Asked if she was in Thailand, he replied: “I don’t know. That’s all I can say.”
The prosecution of Ms. Yingluck, who was Thailand’s first female prime minister, reflects the deep political divide that prevails in the country, run by a military junta that ousted her government three years ago.
Her no-show in court was the latest twist in the drama of a political family that transformed Thai politics by capturing support of the rural poor with promises to raise living standards. Ms. Yingluck and her brother, former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who was overthrown by the military in 2006, remain popular figures.
Ms. Yingluck is charged with mismanaging a rice subsidy initiative while in office, costing the country $8 billion. A conviction could effectively ban her from political activities for life.
Hours after her scheduled hearing, the same court sentenced her former commerce minister, Boonsong Teriyapirom, to 42 years in prison on corruption charges related to the rice subsidy program.
More than a thousand of Ms. Yingluck’s supporters gathered in the capital hours before Friday’s hearing, but the police blocked roadways and set up barricades to prevent the crowd from getting close to the courthouse. The supporters showed up even though she had advised them not to do so.
Ms. Yingluck’s lawyer told the court that she had Meniere’s disease, which causes fluid buildup in the eardrums, and was suffering dizziness and severe headaches, but the court did not accept that as an excuse because Ms. Yingluck had not sent a doctor’s certificate. It rescheduled the verdict for Sept. 27. The court also ordered her to forfeit her bail of 30 million baht, about $900,000.
Unlike her brother, who fled the country and was convicted in absentia on corruption charges, Ms. Yingluck remained in Thailand and fought the charges against her.
Nathathorn Prousoontorn, a police lieutenant general who heads the Immigration Bureau, said that there was no record of her leaving the country since 2014. In May 2015, the court ordered her not to leave Thailand without permission.
There was widespread speculation in the Thai news media and on social media that Ms. Yingluck had gone to Dubai in the United Arab Emirates, possibly by way of Cambodia and Singapore, or to Hong Kong. Her brother has been reported to be living in Dubai.
Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha and Deputy Prime Minister Prawit Wongsuwan told reporters that they had no idea where she was.
“She might be really sick. We don’t know,” Mr. Prawit said. “Maybe she is in some hospital. She is a former prime minister and some officials might have helped her if she is running away. I don’t know if she has left the country or not.”
Even if found not guilty in the rice subsidy case, she still faces possible criminal charges in several other cases of reported financial irregularities and mismanagement.
Ms. Yingluck became prime minister in 2011. Although she was a political neophyte, she was well liked, particularly in the country’s populous north and northeast, where her promises to enrich farmers through subsidies resonated.
Such policies have faced powerful opposition by the urban elite and the military, resulting in longstanding divisions that have been periodically punctuated by upheavals and military interventions.
“The Yingluck case serves as another reminder of Thailand’s two-decade political malaise,” said Thitinan Pongsudhirak, director of the Institute of Security and International Studies at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok.
The standoff began when Ms. Yingluck’s brother, Mr. Thaksin, a one-time telecom billionaire, upended the political establishment when he won elections in 2001 by vowing to reduce income disparity in one of the world’s most unequal societies. Mr. Thaksin promised universal health care and rapid economic growth.
His critics, however, denounced what they called his corrupt business practices and accused his administration of human-rights abuses. A 2006 military coup swept Mr. Thaksin from office. He was later convicted of violating conflict of interest regulations and sentenced to two years in prison, and has been in self-imposed exile.
In every election since Mr. Thaksin’s ouster, a majority of Thai voters has supported forces aligned with him, among them Ms. Yingluck, who became prime minister in 2011.
In 2014, another coup, one of a dozen successful putsches since Thailand’s absolute monarchy was abolished in 1932, ended the tenure of Ms. Yingluck’s government.
The junta’s prime minister, Mr. Prayuth, has promised elections next year. Any victor’s power, however, will be limited by a military-drafted Constitution that stipulates a military-appointed Senate, among other checks on democratic institutions.
Under the junta, thousands of people have been forced to attend “attitude adjustment” camps run by the military, according to Human Rights Watch. Others have been charged with violating restrictions on public gatherings or contravening a law that criminalizes perceived insults of Thailand’s royal family.
