When the police pulled over a car in the small Australian town of Mitchell, it was for what they believed was a straightforward matter: The driver was accused of filling the vehicle’s tank with gasoline and then leaving the station without paying for it.
What they found, however, was by no means routine. Behind the wheel on Sunday was a 22-year-old woman from Britain in a distressed state with visible facial injuries. In the back of the sport utility vehicle was a man hiding under clothes and other items.
The police said that the man, identified only as a 22-year-old from Cairns, in northeastern Australia, had kept the woman captive for two months, raping and assaulting her as they traveled for hundreds of miles across the state of Queensland.
Detective Inspector Paul Hart of the Queensland Police said on Tuesday that the woman, a British citizen who reportedly came to Australia in 2015 but who has not been publicly identified, had been held against her will after a brief relationship with the suspect soured.
“What she has experienced is no doubt horrific and terrifying,” Inspector Hart said, adding that the woman was being treated for facial fractures, scratches and bruises after being rescued on the Warrego Highway, about 350 miles from Brisbane, on the eastern coast of Australia.
The pair met at a party in Cairns in January, the police said, and appeared to be living in the vehicle.
“He had basically deprived her of her liberty, committed a number of offenses against her as they traveled around the state culminating in their location in Mitchell,” Inspector Hart said at a news conference in Toowoomba, west of Brisbane.
The man has been charged with several crimes, including rape, assault, strangulation, deprivation of liberty and drug offenses, “that would have been quite traumatic,” Inspector Hart said. The suspect was denied bail after appearing in court in Roma on Monday, the BBC reported.
“We have potentially saved this young girl’s life,” Inspector Hart said. “It has taken great courage for our victim in this instance to provide the details she has.”
The circumstances the woman was in would likely have made it difficult for her to escape. She was frequently traveling in a remote area, and the BBC, citing the Queensland Police, reported that the suspect had damaged and invalidated her passport.
The woman has made contact with her family in Britain, the BBC reported, although it was not clear when she would be able to return home. The British Foreign Office said it was “supporting a British woman following an incident in Queensland,” news reports said.
