Malaysia Seeks to Question 7 in Killing of Kim Jong-nam
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia — The police in Malaysia are seeking seven more people in the assassination last Monday of the half brother of North Korea’s leader, including four North Koreans who left Malaysia shortly after the killing, a top police official said Sunday.
The announcement came as South Korea publicly accused North Korea of responsibility for killing Kim Jong-nam, the estranged elder brother of Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s leader.
At least 11 people, six of them North Korean, have been linked to the plot to kill Mr. Kim, a high-level target whose death in a heavily trafficked area of Kuala Lumpur International Airport — at the hands of two women who poisoned him, according to preliminary accounts — has drawn international scrutiny.
Noor Rashid Ibrahim, Malaysia’s deputy inspector general of police, said at a news conference in Kuala Lumpur that it was a “sudden and suspicious death” but that the cause had yet to be determined.
He declined to confirm that the victim was Kim Jong-nam, who was using a passport with the name Kim Chol, though the context was clear.
Local news accounts said that two women had carried out the attack by injecting Mr. Kim with a poison or wiping his face with it. Mr. Noor Rashid declined to say whether a widely circulated photograph of a woman wearing a white T-shirt with the letters “LOL” was one of the two women who had been arrested. The image, taken from airport security videos, was leaked to the local news media.
What appears to be airport security video of the attack was posted on YouTube, Malaysia’s The Star newspaper reported. The authenticity of the video could not be verified.
Mr. Noor Rashid also would not comment on claims that the women thought they were taking part in a prank when they reportedly poisoned Mr. Kim at the airport.
In addition to the two women — one from Indonesia and one carrying a Vietnamese passport — the police have arrested a Malaysian man, who is said to be helping the authorities, and Ri Jong Chol, 46, a North Korean man who was living and working in Malaysia.
Mr. Noor Rashid identified the four men who fled the country on the day of the attack as North Koreans ranging in age from 33 to 57. They had arrived separately in Malaysia during the two weeks before the killing, he said. None used a diplomatic passport.
He gave their names as Ri Ji-hyon, 33; Hong Song-hac, 34; O Jong-gil, 55; and Ri Jae-nam, 57.
Mr. Noor Rashid declined to say where they were headed when they left Malaysia. But Channel NewsAsia, citing a senior police official, said the four had arrived Friday in Pyongyang, North Korea, by way of Jakarta, Indonesia; Dubai, United Arab Emirates; and Vladivostok, Russia.
Mr. Noor Rashid said the police were seeking three other men, including a North Korean identified as Ri Ji-u, 30, also known as James.
In Seoul, the South Korean government said there was no doubt that Kim Jong-nam was the victim and added that it held North Korea responsible.
“Given various information we have and the circumstances, our government is certain that the man murdered was Kim Jong-nam,” Jeong Joon-hee, a spokesman for the South’s Unification Ministry, said at a news briefing after Mr. Noor Rashid identified the North Korean suspects. “Given that there are five suspects from North Korea, we believe that the North Korean regime masterminded the incident.”
Mr. Jeong declined to say whether South Korea had additional information that led it to conclude that North Korea was to blame for Mr. Kim’s assassination.
His statement was the first time that South Korea had publicly blamed the North for the killing. Speaking to lawmakers behind closed doors last week, the country’s intelligence chief, Lee Byung-ho, said his agency suspected North Korean involvement.
Mr. Noor Rashid said the police would give the body to Mr. Kim’s next of kin once it had been identified through DNA analysis.
