Kim Jong-nam’s Death  A Geopolitical Whodunit
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia — The two young women were what South Korean intelligence calls “lizard’s tails,” expendable assets to be cast off after an operation.
Guided by North Korean agents, they practiced at malls in Kuala Lumpur, then set their sights on the target: Kim Jong-nam, the estranged elder brother of North Korea’s erratic leader, Kim Jong-un.
With hands doused with toxic liquid, they rubbed the face of their victim, who was waiting to check in for a flight at Kuala Lumpur International Airport. Minutes later, their target died on the way to a hospital. The two women washed their hands and fled.
The suspects were swiftly taken into custody as circumstantial evidence mounted that North Korea was responsible for the attack.
The very public killing of Mr. Kim appears to be another remarkable episode in the annals of bizarre North Korean behavior, a whodunit with geopolitical implications. Speculation swirled that he had been killed to remove him from the line of succession in North Korea.
In the days since the killing was caught on video, the drama has had an ever-expanding and multinational cast of characters — women from Indonesia and Vietnam accused of carrying out the attack, one of whom was apparently wearing a white shirt emblazoned with the letters LOL; a Malaysian boyfriend; and others believed to be North Korean agents.
On Wednesday, Malaysia’s police chief, Khalid Abu Bakar, said a senior diplomat at the North Korean Embassy and an employee of the North Korean state-owned airline, Air Koryo, were also wanted for questioning. Another North Korean, who was not identified, was also being sought. Mr. Khalid also said that extra police officers had been sent to the morgue where Mr. Kim’s body was being kept after an attempt to break into the facility was detected.
North Korea has refused to even acknowledge that the dead man was Kim Jong-nam and has accused Malaysia of carrying out a politically motivated investigation to placate South Korea and the United States.
North Korea has nonetheless demanded that the body be sent there and, in a statement on Wednesday, the North Korean Embassy said the two women were innocent and should be freed.
If the women really had poison on their hands, the embassy statement said, “then how is it possible that these female suspects could still be alive?”
One possible theory is that each woman used a single chemical that became lethal only when mixed with another. The Malaysian police, however, said that the substance or substances used in the attack had not yet been identified.
North Korea has denied any involvement in the killing, which is likely to anger China, its main ally, which has been seen as a protector of Kim Jong-nam.
Mr. Kim had long been on a hit list drawn up by his half brother, Kim Jong-un, according to South Korean intelligence. The younger Mr. Kim, 33, has ordered the execution of scores of senior officials, including at least one disfavored relative, and may have been prompted to act if he believed that Beijing saw his half brother as a possible replacement for him.
Malaysian authorities say the two women arrested, Doan Thi Huong, 28, and Siti Aisyah, 25, were recruited, trained and equipped by four North Koreans who have since fled to their home country.
If the attack was a plot by North Korea, it would not be the first time it had tried to kill Kim Jong-nam.
In 2010, according to South Korean investigators, a North Korean agent based in China received a special order from Pyongyang: “Terminate” Kim Jong-nam and bring his body to the North.
That agent, Kim Young-soo, was told that Kim Jong-nam was going to travel to China from Singapore, where he was then living. The agent’s boss gave him a bundle of cash and ordered him to bribe a taxi driver to run over Mr. Kim in a fake traffic accident.
The plot was scrapped when Mr. Kim failed to arrive as planned. But it came to light in 2012, when the agent was caught entering South Korea and confessed under interrogation.
Since 2011, when Kim Jong-un succeeded his father as North Korea’s ruler, there has been a standing order to assassinate his half brother, South Korean intelligence officials said last week. There was another assassination attempt against him in 2012.
Mr. Kim was so afraid that he begged for his life in a letter to his half brother in 2012.
“Please withdraw the order to punish me and my family,” Mr. Kim was quoted as saying in the letter. “We have nowhere to hide. The only way to escape is to choose suicide.”
The Kim family, which has ruled North Korea since its founding in 1948, has presided over a Shakesp
