Qatar Criticizes ‘Face-Saving’ Move by Arab Antagonists in Gulf Crisis
The seemingly eased demands on Qatar made by the four Arab countries that have severed relations with it are an insincere “face-saving approach” to resolving the Persian Gulf crisis, Qatar’s United Nations ambassador said on Wednesday.
The ambassador, Alya Ahmed al-Thani, also said there could be no direct negotiations until her country’s antagonists ended their economic boycott of Qatar, which she described as an illegal “siege” causing deep harm.
The remarks by the ambassador in a telephone interview appeared to signal no hint of progress in the dispute, which erupted on June 5 and has bared bitter fractures among gulf Arab neighbors that share strong alliances with the United States.
Ms. Thani spoke a day after diplomats from the countries that broke relations with Qatar — Bahrain, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates — indicated they were no longer insisting on compliance with 13 specific demands. Instead, the diplomats said, they have reframed their position as requesting Qatar’s adherence to six “principles.”
The 13 demands, which the Qataris leaked upon receiving them last month, were widely regarded as sweeping and unrealistic, even by countries far removed from the dispute.
They amounted to an ultimatum that Qatar close the popular Qatari-owned news network Al Jazeera, drastically downgrade relations with Iran, close a Turkish military base, sever contacts with the Muslim Brotherhood and other groups deemed to incite extremism and terrorism, and undergo monthly monitoring to ensure compliance.
Qatar, which has denied accusations that it encourages terrorism and instability, described the demands as a cynical guise by the Saudi-led group of adversaries to subvert Qatari sovereignty.
The more generic set of six principles that have since been articulated by the four countries would commit all parties in the dispute to stopping terrorism, extremism and incitement; denying financing and shelter to terrorist groups; and refraining from interference in the internal affairs of others.
Ms. Thani described the revised position of the other countries as “a response to the heat they have already received” on the 13 demands.
“They have received a lot of criticism for their approach, the take-it-or-leave-it approach,” she said.
“It’s just a face-saving approach by the four countries,” she added. “For us, it’s unfortunately not a sign of good faith or flexibility.”
Much of the dispute revolves around Al Jazeera, particularly its Arab-language broadcasts, which Qatar’s adversaries have described as incendiary and beyond the bounds of free speech.
The United Arab Emirates’ foreign minister, Anwar Gargash, sought to substantiate that assertion in a July 9 letter to the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, who had called the demand for Al Jazeera’s shutdown “an unacceptable attack on the right to freedom of expression and opinion.” 
The letter listed examples of Al Jazeera broadcasts that Mr. Gargash said had favorably portrayed figures like Osama bin Laden of Al Qaeda, Khaled Meshal of Hamas and Hassan Nasrallah of Hezbollah. “Al Jazeera has presented opportunities for terrorist groups to threaten, recruit and incite, without challenge or restraint,” Mr. Gargash said.
Qatar has rejected the criticism over Al Jazeera, one of the most widely watched channels in the Middle East. “We are proud of hosting Al Jazeera,” Ms. Thani said.
The ambassador also shared documents that Qatar’s foreign minister had submitted to the United Nations secretary general, António Guterres, accusing Qatar’s four antagonists of having trampled on the United Nations Charter and international human rights law in the severance of diplomatic and economic ties.
The documents included a July 7 report by Qatar’s human rights committee detailing hundreds of complaints about the effects. They included the arbitrary separation of families, the inability of Qatari students to complete the school year and enormous losses by Qatari owners of businesses in the other countries.
The committee’s report also accused the other countries of having threatened severe punishment to any citizen deemed friendly to Qatar. “Just wearing a Barcelona or Paris St.-Germain T-shirt out of sympathy is enough for a person to receive severe punishment,” it said, referring to soccer teams with major financial connections to Qatar.
