Shooting in Sydney Raises Questions About Gun Control
SYDNEY, Australia — A gunman was shot dead by the police on Wednesday after an hourlong shooting spree across western Sydney that targeted a home and two police stations.
The police said the man, firing a shotgun in the middle of a busy suburb, wounded several officers, including one who suffered a head injury.
The shooting comes at a time of rising concern among gun control advocates in Australia who have been arguing for years that the country’s strict gun laws — passed after a mass shooting in 1996 — have been weakened over time by a small but powerful gun lobby.
Gun ownership has increased over the past 20 years, with roughly 3.2 million firearms in circulation, according to gunpolicy.org, and recent reports have shown that gun owners now have more guns — about 3.9 guns each compared with 2.1 guns in 1997.
Indiscriminate gun violence, while still rare, seems to be re-emerging across the country.
In June, a gunman shot and killed four people in the northern city of Darwin. And last year, seven people, including four children, were found dead from gunshot wounds. It was the country’s worst mass shooting in more than 20 years.
New South Wales, the state that includes Sydney, is often described as Australia’s least restrictive jurisdiction when it comes to protection from guns because it allows the use of silencers, has removed a requirement that people provide a reason for owning extra firearms and does not limit ammunition purchases.
But it was not clear if Wednesday’s shooting reflected any of these broader trends. The police said the motive for Wednesday’s shooting was not clear, and they did not identify the gunman, or detail his history with weapons.
The violence started around 8:45 p.m. when the gunman, armed with a pump-action 12-gauge shotgun, fired on a home, then traveled to a police station and fired several shots at the building.
Twenty minutes later, he appeared outside the Penrith police station and fired several rounds before being shot dead by the police.
Deputy Commissioner Jeff Loy of the NSW Police Metropolitan Field Operations described the attack on the police as “extreme.”
“It’s a very unusual event,” he said.
