Slovak Journalist Found Shot to Death at Home
BRATISLAVA, Slovakia — A 27-year-old Slovak journalist who had been investigating corruption has been found shot to death at his home along with his fiancée, the authorities said Monday.
The killing — which appeared to be the first targeted slaying of a journalist in Slovakia’s modern history — was immediately condemned by officials, who vowed to investigate.
The journalist, Jan Kuciak, and his fiancée, Martina Kusnirova, both 27, appear to have been killed on Thursday in the village of Velka Maca, in western Slovakia, according to the office of the general prosecutor. Their bodies were found on Sunday after Ms. Kusnirova’s mother was unable to reach her.
Ms. Kusnirova was shot in the head and Mr. Kuciak in the chest, the authorities said.
“If it turned out that the death of the investigative reporter was connected to his work, it would mean an unprecedented attack on the freedom of press and democracy in Slovakia,” Prime Minister Robert Fico said in a statement.
The killings were condemned by the European Union and by journalists across Slovakia.
“Murder of journalists is a clear sign of a crime against one of the most important pillars of liberty: freedom of speech and the right of citizens to check the powerful and those who break the law,” a group of top Slovak news editors said in a statement. They were joined by colleagues from the Czech Republic — which until the end of 1992 was joined with Slovakia as one country — and from Reporters Without Borders and other human rights groups.
Antonio Tajani, the president of the European Parliament, recalled the killing last October of Daphne Caruana Galizia, a Maltese investigative journalist, and said the body would not rest until justice was done.
“The E.U. cannot accept that a journalist is killed for doing his job,” he said. “I call on Slovak authorities to launch a thorough investigation, with international support, if needed, for Jan Kuciak.”
Mr. Kuciak had worked for three years for a Slovak news portal, Aktuality.sk, that is published by Ringier Axel Springer, a joint Swiss-German media company.
“We are shocked and stunned about the message that Jan Kuciak and his companion obviously have been the victim of a cruel assassination,” the company said in a statement. It said that if the crime was intended “to deter” the company from uncovering any misconduct, “we will use this as an opportunity to take our journalistic responsibility” with even greater determination.
At a news conference, the top police official, Tibor Gaspar, said the killings were most likely connected to Mr. Kuciak’s reporting. Investigators were trying to piece together what he had been working on most recently.
The country’s elite was unified in condemning the deaths, and the government offered a reward of 1 million euros to anyone with information leading to the killer or killers.
“I am shaken and terrified that something like this could happen in Slovakia,” President Andrej Kiska said in a statement. “The coldblooded murder of young people is an atrocity that has to be punished. We have to find the people who did this and secure the safety of journalists.”
The justice minister, Lucia Zitnanska, said in a statement: “Slovakia can’t be a country where journalists are murdered.”
Mr. Kuciak, who studied journalism in Nitra, Slovakia, had written about shady financing or tax evasion in companies connected to well-known Slovak oligarchs and businessmen, many of them linked to the governing party, or to two powerful men: Robert Kalinak, the interior minister, and Jan Pociatek, a former finance minister. His most recent articles focused on a Slovak oligarch, Marian Kocner, and his companies.
In October, Mr. Kuciak wrote on Facebook that he had filed a report on Mr. Kocner for threatening him the previous month. Mr. Kocner, he wrote, said that he would “collect dirt” on the reporter and his family and would not stop until he would “never write anything again.”
On Monday, Mr. Kocner issued a statement deploring the killings and calling allegations that he had threatened Mr. Kuciak absurd.
Last fall, Mr. Kalinak, the interior minister, ridiculed journalists who asked about the threats. “This is what you do, dig up dirt,” he said.
Slovakia, then part of Czechoslovakia, emerged from communist rule in 1989. During its transition to democracy, in the 1990s, journalists were regularly attacked and threatened for their work when Vladimir Meciar governed as prime minister with a populist and authoritarian style.
Slovakia joined the European Union in 2004 and is generally seen as having a robust legal system. Last year, it was ranked 17th in the 2017 World Press Freedom Index. However, media ownership is heavily concentrated in the hands of a few businesspeople, and dissenting voices often face pressure.
Veronika Remisova, an opposition lawmaker, said that Mr. Fico, the prime minister, and Andrej Danko, the speaker of Parliament, had created an environment of hostility for journalists by demeaning and criticizing them publicly. She and other opposition politicians called for Mr. Kalinak, the interior minister, to step down because, they said, the police had failed to protect Mr. Kuciak.
On Monday night, candles were lit in Bratislava and other cities in Slovakia and in Prague in memory of the slain journalist and his fiancée.
Peter Nagy, another journalist, said he and his wife, who is expecting a baby in three months, were planning a demonstration on March 13 to demand accountability.
“We don’t want it to be born to a society where people are afraid to speak up and journalists are afraid to work,” he said in an interview. “Murder of a journalist is a murder of society, of the voice of public and of our values.”
