South Korea Proposes Joint Economic Projects to Prod North to Denuclearize
SEOUL, South Korea — South Korea’s leader on Tuesday urged President Trump to offer joint North-South economic projects as an incentive for North Korea to denuclearize when he meets with its leader, Kim Jong-un, next week.
President Moon Jae-in and Mr. Trump spoke on the phone on Tuesday to discuss Mr. Trump’s planned second summit meeting with Mr. Kim,  scheduled to take place in Hanoi, Vietnam, next Wednesday and Thursday. Washington is studying what Mr. Trump can offer in exchange for North Korean steps toward denuclearization.
Mr. Moon urged Mr. Trump to give South Korea a role in measures to encourage the North’s denuclearization, said Mr. Moon’s spokesman, Kim Eui-kyeom, referring to cross-border economic projects Mr. Moon has supported. “President Moon said if President Trump asks, South Korea will be ready to do its part, lessening the United States’ burden,” Mr. Kim said.
When they met for the first time in June in Singapore, Mr. Trump and the North Korean leader struck a vague agreement to build “new” relations and to “work toward complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.” But negotiations between the countries have since stalled. Mr. Trump is under pressure to use the Hanoi meeting to work out concrete plans for carrying out the June agreement.
North Korea has so far suspended nuclear and long-range missile tests and destroyed its underground nuclear test site. It has also offered to dismantle a long-range rocket launchpad and engine test facility and invite international experts to watch. But it insists that any further actions it can take — including the permanent destruction of the Yongbyon nuclear complex, a key facility for producing nuclear bomb fuel — will come only if the United States takes corresponding actions.
In a public hearing last month, senior American intelligence officials, sounding a far more pessimistic note than Mr. Trump has, said that North Korea was unlikely to give up its nuclear weapons.
Speaking with reporters on Tuesday, Mr. Trump said that he and Mr. Moon had had a broad discussion about the summit meeting, and he reiterated his view that he was in “no particular rush” on denuclearization. He said he would speak about the meeting with the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, on Wednesday.
“I would like to see ultimately denuclearization of North Korea,” Mr. Trump said, adding, “I really believe North Korea can be a tremendous economic power when this is resolved.”
“As long as there’s no testing, I’m in no rush,” the president said.
With little more than a week to go before the Hanoi meeting, United States and North Korean officials planned to meet in the Vietnamese capital this week to negotiate a potential deal, to be announced by their leaders next week.
Among possible incentives it can offer, Washington has studied exchanging liaison offices with Pyongyang and declaring an end to the 1950-53 Korean War, which was halted in a truce, according to South Korean officials familiar with United States-North Korean talks.
North Korea’s top priority is the easing of economic sanctions. But Washington is reluctant to lessen its economic pressure on the North because doing so would weaken the strongest leverage it has to force the country to rid itself of nuclear weapons.
On Tuesday, Mr. Moon appeared to suggest that if Washington could not immediately ease United Nations or bilateral sanctions, it should consider letting South Korea press ahead with inter-Korean collaborative projects, such as the relinking of railways of the two Koreas, as an alternative incentive for the North.
North Korea has wanted those projects.
During his New Year’s Day speech, Mr. Kim called for the reopening of the joint inter-Korean factory park in the North Korean city of Kaesong, as well as South Korean tours to the North’s Diamond Mountain. The Diamond Mountain and Kaesong projects had provided badly needed foreign currency for the impoverished North until they were shut down in 2008 and 2016, amid rising tensions between the two sides.
Mr. Moon supports broader inter-Korean economic cooperation, arguing that it will help encourage the North to denuclearize by demonstrating the potential economic benefits.
But to promote those projects, South Korea needs exemptions from international sanctions that ban investments, joint ventures and other significant economic cooperation with the North. Until now, Washington has been reluctant to help South Korea win such exemptions, insisting that it refrain from joint economic projects until the North takes important steps toward denuclearization.
Mr. Moon’s critics, including conservative South Koreans, say that an easing of sanctions will only encourage North Korea to drag its feet over denuclearization. They also warn that any exemptions would undermine Washington’s own international efforts to enforce sanctions. China and Russia are already calling for easing the economic restrictions around North Korea.
