Australian Leaders Plan Vote on Same-Sex Marriage, One Way or Another
SYDNEY, Australia — Australia’s governing Liberal Party met for hours behind closed doors on Tuesday to debate same-sex marriage, twisting itself in knots and ending up with a two-step approach: If the Senate does not open the polls for a compulsory national vote, party officials said, then Australians will be invited to cast voluntary ballots on the issue by mail as early as September.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, speaking at a news conference after the discussions, said that holding a postal vote if the Senate rejected an in-person one would give people the opportunity to “have their say,” though neither vote would be legally binding.
After months of delays and rumors about how Australia would make a democratic decision about the contentious issue, the process itself has become a subject of widespread scorn.
While other countries have decided on same-sex marriage in the courts or in Parliament, lawmakers in Australia have spent months bickering about mechanisms. The disagreements include whether to put the issue to legislators or voters, and whether that should be through the mail or a national vote, known in Australia as a plebiscite.
They have also argued about timing, costs and the scope of possible campaigns for and against same-sex marriage, even as a good deal of the negotiating has taken place away from public view.
For many, the process is emblematic of what critics across the political spectrum describe as the insider-driven gamesmanship of Canberra, the capital, and the lack of clear leadership from Mr. Turnbull and his party.
“It’s all a mess,” said Peter Lewis, executive director of Essential Media, a public affairs and research company that works with progressive organizations.
Morning television has been equally scathing.
Karl Stefanovic, a host of “Today,” unleashed a fierce attack on the government on Tuesday, telling politicians to “get on with it.”
“Why do we elect officials if not to make decisions that reflect our beliefs?” Mr. Stefanovic asked.
Polls show that the majority of Australians believe same-sex marriage should be legalized. Experts say that has been the case for quite some time.
Ryan Goss, a senior lecturer in law at Australian National University, pointed to the internal politics of the conservative coalition led by the Liberal Party as a complication.
“The solution that the government is proposing is a political compromise designed to involve the Australian people in the decision, but in an unprecedented way and in a way that the Constitution doesn’t require,” Mr. Goss said.
Experts say it is unlikely that legislation supporting a national plebiscite (or same-sex marriage) will pass the Senate this week. In light of that, the government is expected to use its executive power to conduct a nationwide vote by mail, which could be blocked in court.
If that vote does proceed, and Australians decide yes by mail, a parliamentary vote on same-sex marriage could happen before the end of the year — but only if the party in power agrees to it. The postal vote, with an estimated cost of $122 million, will not change the law but simply provide additional guidance about public opinion.
“That will be frustrating for advocates of marriage equality because it is absolutely clear in Australian law that Parliament could make this change today or this week if it wanted to,” Mr. Goss said. “There are no constitutional or legal reasons to hold this nationwide vote whatsoever.”
Several Liberal Party lawmakers have expressed exasperation with the handful of colleagues, including former Prime Minister Tony Abbott, who have resisted a simple vote in Parliament.
Christopher Pyne, a federal minister and member of the Liberal Party, said in June that he favored legalizing same-sex marriage and always had.
“I’ve said for many years that I want marriage equality in Australia, and I’ve campaigned for it,” Mr. Pyne said on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation program “Q&A.” He has told supporters of same-sex marriage: “Have hope that there will be marriage equality in Australia, that it will come eventually.”
Terri Butler, one of the opposition Labor Party’s key advocates on same-sex marriage, said it was clear that a majority of the members of Parliament supported legalization and would vote yes if given the chance.
“This is not a situation where the Parliament is against marriage equality,” Ms. Butler said. “The problem is there is a minority of members of Parliament who nonetheless hold a majority of the influence in the executive government who are preventing the executive government from agreeing to allowing the Parliament to vote.”
Ms. Butler said it was “utterly ridiculous” to put in place “all these processes” before “they will even let us have a vote in the Parliament.”
“What’s happening is idiotic,” she said in an interview. “It’s really, really stupid.”
