Venezuela’s Supreme Court Gives Opposition Mayor 15-Month Jail Term
Venezuela’s Supreme Court sentenced on Tuesday an opposition mayor to 15 months in jail, as the government continued its crackdown on the opposition.
The mayor, Ramón Muchacho, who led the wealthy Chacao district in Caracas, was also stripped of his position and barred from holding public office, according to a statement issued by the judges. The court has also ordered a second opposition mayor, David Smolansky, to appear before it on Wednesday.
The officials, both well-known politicians in their parties, were among 13 mayors who had been ordered by the judges in May to halt anti-government protests that involved erecting barricades to block traffic. The protests continued, with many mayors arguing that residents had a right to peaceful protest under the country’s laws.
The court has sentenced at least three other mayors to 15 months in jail for failing to comply with the court’s order. The others include Gustavo Marcano of Lechería, Carlos García of Mérida and Alfredo Ramos of Barquisimeto, a large city in northwestern Venezuela.
Mr. Muchacho was not in custody on Tuesday.
“The weight of revolutionary injustice has fallen upon me and Chacao,” he wrote in a statement that he posted online. “They have condemned us for doing our work, for guaranteeing the legitimate right to peaceful protest.”
He said he still considered himself the “legitimate mayor” of the district.
The crackdown on mayors was viewed broadly as part of a plan by Venezuela’s leaders to secure control of the country. In a vote on July 30, Venezuelans were asked to choose delegates for a constituent assembly from a list of allies of the governing party. The assembly will rewrite the Constitution and govern the nation for up to two years without elections.
Voters were not given the option of rejecting the government’s plan, and opposition parties boycotted the vote.
On Tuesday, the United Nations joined the growing criticism of the government, saying Venezuela had used excessive force to crush anti-government protests.
Of the 124 people who were killed in violence that accompanied demonstrations, security forces were responsible for 46 deaths and pro-government armed groups known as “colectivos” were responsible for 27 deaths, the United Nations said in a statement.
The organization’s investigators were unable to determine who was responsible for the other deaths. But the United Nations said that some anti-government demonstrators had also resorted to violence and that eight members of the security forces had been killed during demonstrations.
The world body’s findings provided the first independent assessment of the death toll in four months of mounting turmoil as Venezuela plunges deeper into an economic and humanitarian crisis.
“These violations have occurred amid the breakdown of the rule of law in Venezuela, with constant attacks by the government against the National Assembly and the attorney general’s office,” Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, said in the statement.
