Quebec Doctors Make a Pay Demand  Don’t Raise It
In a move that has drawn international interest, nearly 740 doctors, residents and medical students in Quebec are demanding that the province not follow through on promises to raise their pay.
Like many things related to Canada’s health care debate, the reasons behind the extraordinary request from the doctors are complex and, in some cases, political. But a petition detailing their concerns appeared online in late February after several nurses in the province set off a discussion about the medical system by describing their working conditions, including an unmanageable number of patients and marathon shifts extended by mandatory overtime.
The doctors want the province to take money that would have been used to increase their incomes and give it to nurses and other health care workers who are dealing with issues like pay cuts and crushing workloads.
“The system has to change — it will not survive much longer,” said Isabelle Leblanc, a family physician in Montreal who is one of the petition’s organizers and a professor at McGill University. “For a long time the system has revolved around physicians and hospitals.”
While Dr. Leblanc said she was gratified that 210 specialists were among the petitioners, the group looking to turn back raises remains a tiny minority within Quebec’s medical community. According to the Canadian Medical Association, the province  has 20,254 doctors.
Dr. Leblanc’s group, Médecins Québécois Pour le Régime Public, first began demanding that its members’ raises be used elsewhere in 2015 after the government announced a series of budget cuts. Those early efforts, however, attracted relatively little notice.
She said that nurses who recently described seemingly impossible workloads to the news media and on social media raised the doctors’ current request to prominence and prompted a debate over compensation.
“It’s not money we’re lacking, it’s better allocating it,” Dr. Leblanc said.
Like most of their counterparts in Canada, Quebec’s doctors are not paid salaries but rather a fee for each service they perform. Because any individual doctor’s income depends on how much she or he works and the complexity of the task, it can be difficult to compare incomes between provinces. But Dr. Leblanc acknowledged that two decades ago, Quebec sat near the bottom in Canada.
A series of negotiations involving the separate groups that represent family doctors and specialists and several governments have led to a series of raises. By one estimate, the incomes of specialist physicians in Quebec increased by 160,000 Canadian dollars between 2009 and 2016. On average they now earn 403,537 Canadian dollars a year, or about $315,000 a year, according to the Canadian Institute for Health Information.
Current agreements with the government guarantee that raises for specialists continue until 2023.
Some critics suggest that conflicts of interest among politicians cloud the debate. Philippe Couillard, Quebec’s premier, is a neurosurgeon. Earlier in his career, as health minister, he negotiated some of the raises doctors are now enjoying. A radiologist, Gaétan Barrette, is the current health minister. He was the president of the specialist physicians’ group when it won raises for its members.
Dr. Leblanc, however, said that the health funding problems were systemic and not isolated to the current Liberal government or related to the backgrounds of its members.
Late last month, Dr. Barrette said that if doctors wanted to turn down pay raises, he would find other uses for the money. He acknowledged that improvements must be made for nurses, but he said he did not think that members of his previous profession were overpaid.
“We’re entering a new chapter regarding working conditions of nurses,” Mr. Barrette told reporters in Montreal. “To me, this is much more important than talking about doctors and money.”
