Israel and Australia Promote Closer Ties in Netanyahu Visit
SYDNEY, Australia — Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel was warmly welcomed here Wednesday by his Australian counterpart, Malcolm Turnbull, with the Israeli leader promoting the two countries’ growing ties as Israel faces rising international criticism over its settlement policy in the West Bank.
Mr. Netanyahu said at a joint news conference that he was Israel’s first prime minister to visit officially. “It’s been a long time coming,” he said. “It celebrates, really, a hundred years of friendship of Australia to the Jewish people and their state.”
Mr. Netanyahu’s visit has generated some pushback here, with 60 notable Australians having signed a letter opposing it because of Israel’s policies toward the Palestinians.
Australia was one of a handful of countries to speak out against a United Nations Security Council resolution critical of recent moves to expand Israeli settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Australia called the resolution “one sided” and “deeply unsettling.”
Mr. Netanyahu praised its stance, saying, “Australia’s been courageously willing to puncture U.N. hypocrisy, more than once.”
Mr. Turnbull said Australia’s position on a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — a goal that President Trump recently seemed to call into question — “is exactly the same as it has been for many years.”
He continued, “We support an outcome which has two states where Israelis, the Israeli people, the Palestinian people live side by side as a result of direct negotiations between them.”
But, Mr. Turnbull said: “You cannot expect any Israeli government to put itself in a position where its security is at risk, where its citizens are not safe.”
The visit comes as Australia’s support of Israel faces increasing scrutiny domestically. Bill Shorten, the leader of the opposition Labor Party, who is also supportive of Israel, is facing pressure to declare his party’s official position as backing recognition of a state of Palestine.
In Wednesday’s public remarks, the two leaders highlighted the nations’ ties. Mr. Turnbull cited a new agreement on technology and innovation and work on a deal for direct air travel between the countries. Trade between the two now totals about 1.3 billion Australian dollars, or about $1 billion, a year.
