Most of Mosul Airport Is Taken by Iraqi Forces in Push Against ISIS
MOSUL, Iraq — Iraqi forces seized most of Mosul’s airport on Thursday, an important milestone in the broader offensive to retake the western half of the country’s second-largest city from the Islamic State, Iraqi and allied officials said.
The push to take the airport, which has been led by the Iraqi federal police, is a promising start to what is expected to be a difficult and bloody fight to completely evict the Islamic State from the city.
“They are most of the way through the airfield,” Brig. Gen. Matthew C. Isler, a senior United States Air Force officer in the American-led headquarters in Baghdad, said late Thursday afternoon.
It took Iraqi forces 100 days to seize the eastern half of the city, an operation that led to significant Iraqi casualties. Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the head of the United States Central Command, who arrived in Baghdad on Thursday, said about 500 Iraqi military personnel had been killed and about 3,000 had been wounded in that operation.
After taking the eastern portion of the city, Iraqi forces paused for three weeks to form a strategy to reclaim the western half without enduring such punishing attrition.
They decided to resume their offensive by taking the rest of the city on multiple axes so that the Islamic State would find it difficult to coordinate its defenses.
“They are ahead of schedule of where we thought they would be,” said Brig. Gen. Hugh McAslan of New Zealand, who is a senior officer in the American-led international coalition here.
The renewed Iraqi offensive was preceded by a week of powerful American-led airstrikes, during which 158 bombs were dropped on 33 targets, including the headquarters from which commanders of the Islamic State, also know as ISIS or ISIL, were believed to be operating. Among the other targets were places where the militants assembled car bombs.
The Islamic State first conquered the city in 2014, but it has consistently lost ground in recent months to Iraqi forces backed by coalition air support.
One bombing attack was directed at a five-story building in Al Jumhuri medical complex in western Mosul that an American official said had been turned into an Islamic State command center. Militants often use hospitals, schools and religious buildings in the hopes that coalition forces will be reluctant to bomb them. In this instance, American officials said they had determined that no civilians were present.
In another move to buttress the Iraqis, American advisers have been operating closer to the fighting and at lower levels of the Iraqi chain of command.
Iraqi forces have been attacking with a three-pronged approach. Moving south to north, Iraq’s federal police took Abu Saif, a town that sits on high ground overseeing the Mosul airport, before moving on to the airfield itself.
To the west of the federal police, Iraq’s counterterrorism service, the country’s premier fighting force, has been moving north toward the former Ghazlani military base. All 14 of the counterterrorism service’s fighting battalions have been committed to the Mosul fight, a spokesman for the force said.
Farther west still is the Iraqi Army’s Ninth Division, a tank unit.
American and allied planes, including F-15E Strike Eagles, AV-8B Harriers and French warplanes, have provided close air support for the Iraqis. The Americans have used armed drones, and American Army Apache attack helicopters have also fired Hellfire missiles to help the Iraqis advance.
Shiite militias, officially known as the Popular Mobilization Forces, have moved to cut off the routes to Mosul and are operating west of the city. The Americans have not been carrying out airstrikes to support these fighters, many of whom are backed by Iran. Instead, Iraqi F-16s and attack helicopters have been carrying out strikes in this area.
The battle for the old part of western Mosul, with its many narrow and winding streets, is expected to be difficult. Armored vehicles cannot maneuver in such close quarters. Much of the fighting will need to be done by Iraqi troops fighting house to house in a section of the city that is still home to an estimated 750,000 civilians.
The precise number of Islamic State fighters in Mosul is not clear, though some military officials estimated there were 4,000 to 6,000 militants there.
The runways in the Mosul airport have been heavily damaged by the Islamic State to prevent Iraq and its allies from ferrying in troops and supplies.
Satellite images of the airport published by the geopolitical intelligence company Stratfor show wide trenches cutting across the runways and piles of rubble positioned to create a barrier. Even adjacent taxiways and aprons, where planes typically park, have been destroyed.
Still, the airport and the Ghazlani base are important terrain and sit astride the southern approach to the old part of the city.
The advancing troops began their approach in snaking rows of Humvees across the bald hills at first light, moving in meandering patterns across rocky terrain. Soldiers with belt-fed weapons and M-19 grenade launchers sat atop them as they approached the airfield.
Capt. Abdulhadi Ahmed of Iraq’s counterterrorism unit said that Islamic State snipers had taken up positions in the air traffic control towers.
“ISIS bodies were mixed with the rubble all over the place,” Maj. Abdulsalam Aljibouri said. “We noticed that many ISIS fighters had taken off their vests and helmets to escape the airport faster.”
When the Iraqi troops finally got onto the runway, some of them broke out in celebratory songs, but some said they could not help being saddened by the sight.
“We were happy for the victory, but sad for the level of destruction of such an important airport,” Captain Ahmed said.
