U.S. Plans Sale of Warplanes to Nigeria for Fighting Boko Haram
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration is poised to sell up to 12 light attack aircraft to Nigeria to support the country’s fight against the Boko Haram militant group, despite criticism from human rights organizations that the West African country has not done enough to stop the abuses and corruption that flourish in the military.
The pending move is the third time in three years that the United States has moved toward selling the Super Tucano attack planes, a transaction that would require congressional approval. The Obama administration stopped one proposed sale on Jan. 17 just as it was about to be sent to Congress for approval, after a Nigerian fighter jet searching for Boko Haram members accidentally bombed a camp for displaced people, killing dozens of people and wounding more.
But in a telephone conversation with President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria on Feb. 15, President Trump indicated that he would take another look at the proposed sale, administration officials said. “President Trump expressed support for the sale of aircraft from the United States to support Nigeria’s fight against Boko Haram,” the White House said in a statement after the call.
Several officials from the State Department, the Pentagon and the White House said that the sale of the attack airplanes, valued at $600 million, would help the Nigerian Air Force battle the militant extremist group Boko Haram.
The Super Tucano, a propeller-driven plane that is capable of reconnaissance and surveillance missions as well as attacks, is produced in part in Florida by Embraer of Brazil and the Sierra Nevada Corporation, a company in the United States. The potential for sales of American-made aircraft also played a part in Mr. Trump’s decision to move on the deal, one administration official said on Tuesday.
The proposed sale is the latest installment in the on-again-off-again nature of the relationship between the Nigerian and American militaries.
Under the previous Nigerian president, Goodluck Jonathan, that relationship frayed, and the Pentagon routinely bypassed Nigeria in the fight against Boko Haram, choosing to work directly with neighboring Cameroon, Chad and Niger. In addition to citing corruption and sweeping human rights abuses by Nigerian soldiers, American officials were hesitant to share intelligence with the Nigerian military, saying Boko Haram had infiltrated it. That accusation prompted indignation from Nigeria.
After Mr. Buhari, a former Nigerian Army major general, defeated Mr. Jonathan in an election in 2015 on a campaign pledge to root out corruption, ties began to warm between the two militaries. But a prolonged absence from Nigeria by Mr. Buhari caused additional uncertainty at the Pentagon.
When Gen. Thomas D. Waldhauser made his first visit to Nigeria in February as the top officer of the United States Africa Command, he met with Vice President Yemi Osinbajo, not Mr. Buhari, who was still in London for medical care.
Officials said the airplanes would not be ready for delivery until the end of the year. New pilots must also be trained, a process that takes several months.
American officials said the United States would continue to emphasize to the Nigerian government that human rights abuses and violations by its security forces, as well as corruption, impede efforts to defeat Boko Haram.
Sarah Margon, the Washington director with Human Rights Watch, said on Tuesday that the Nigerian military has a history of attacks that inflict a heavy civilian toll and that the January bombing of the camp for displaced people “is not the sole example that we have of the air force dropping munitions on civilians.”
Last year, the Nigerian military carried out massacres in two villages in the Marte area of northeastern Nigeria, according to numerous witnesses. They said soldiers arrived looking for suspected Boko Haram fighters and when villagers said none existed, they gunned down more than 100 unarmed men.
Asked what had changed since Jan. 17, when the Obama administration stopped the sale, Ms. Margon said: “President Trump has made really clear that fighting terrorism, as they define this, is going to be the top foreign policy priority. And that means that the consideration of mitigating circumstances and other issues that could create a problem in the long term will not be at the forefront.”
Matthew Page, a consultant who until recently was the State Department’s top expert on Nigeria, called the proposed sale an empty gesture aimed at blunting criticism that the United States had not done enough to help Nigeria fight Boko Haram.
“U.S. policy makers know full well it’s a flawed deal that ignores longstanding and unresolved human rights concerns,” Mr. Page said. “Cash-strapped Nigeria is about to fork over the equivalent of half its defense budget to the world’s wealthiest country for just 12 propeller planes.”
The Nigerian military has made major advances against Boko Haram, which once controlled large parts of northeastern Nigeria and had huge, crowded camps. But Mr. Page said the aircraft are poorly suited for the current phase of the war because Boko Haram no longer has the capability to gather large groups of fighters out in the open. Instead, militants now keep a low profile and send suicide bombers to attack civilian targets.
A spokesman for Mr. Buhari referred questions to the military. A spokesman for the Nigerian military did not respond to requests for comment.
Trump administration officials said the paperwork for the sale is expected to go to the State Department from the White House in the next few days. The State Department will then formally notify relevant House and Senate committees.
