The Best Movies and TV Shows New on Netflix Canada in November
Every month, Netflix Canada adds a new batch of TV shows and movies to its library. Here are the titles we think are most interesting for November, broken down by release date. Netflix occasionally changes schedules without giving notice.
‘American Son’
Starts streaming: Nov. 1
After a run on Broadway, Christopher Demos-Brown’s play comes to Netflix with few big-screen adornments, maintaining the chamber-piece intensity of an African-American mother trying desperately to figure out what the authorities have done with her son. Also ported over from the Broadway production are the director Kenny Leon and his star, Kerry Washington, who paces the waiting area of a Miami police station after her son, an incoming West Point student, didn’t return home after a night out with friends. As she and her estranged husband (Steven Pasquale) question an officer (Jeremy Jordan), they’re met with obfuscation and some coded language that reflects racial bias.
‘Fire in Paradise’
Starts streaming: Nov. 1
As the effects of climate change continue to bear down in California, the dry conditions have made wildfires a perpetual threat to vast swaths of land and populated areas. The 40-minute documentary “Fire in Paradise” focuses on the Camp Fire of 2018, the deadliest forest fire in the state’s history, and how it affected the small town of Paradise, where residents had to flee their homes on short notice. The film interviews survivors and emergency workers, but it’s the assemblage of firsthand video footage that best underlines the urgency and terror of the situation.
‘The King’
Starts streaming: Nov. 1
Inspired loosely by Shakespeare’s “Henriad” plays, David Michôd’s expensive historical epic is about the clash between nations, but it’s also about the clash between two young stars, Timothée Chalamet and Robert Pattinson, who are considered among the most talented of their generation. In a distinctly modern spin on the reluctant hero, Chalamet plays Hal, a hard-partying prince who’s slow to accept his ascendence to the throne as Henry V, but treachery from within and without forces him to mature quickly as a leader. Pattinson gets the smaller but showier role as the cackling Dauphin of France, who challenges the young king at the Battle of Agincourt.
‘Earthquake Bird’
Starts streaming: Nov. 15
The last time director Ridley Scott visited Japan, he came away with the 1989 Michael Douglas vehicle “Black Rain,” an action thriller full of yakuza violence and motorcycle chases. Now Scott has returned to that milieu as the producer of Wash Westmoreland’s “Earthquake Bird,” which also takes place in 1989 Japan, following Alicia Vikander as a Swedish translator who has to answer for the disappearance of an American friend (Riley Keough). Through flashbacks, the film delves into the mysteries of their relationship and the suspects who might be responsible for a deadly crime. Westmoreland’s last two films, “Colette” and “Still Alice,” featured strong performances from their lead actresses — Keira Knightley and Julianne Moore, respectively — and he has two more excellent talents here.
‘Klaus’
Starts streaming: Nov. 15
It’s a good thing that children are more interested in getting toys than looking for holes in the Santa Claus story, because the mythology is getting awfully jumbled. Featuring a wealth of comedic voice talent, the animated comedy “Klaus” traces Santa’s origins to the miserable Arctic Circle town of Smeerensburg, where an underachieving postal worker (Jason Schwartzman) discovers Klaus (J.K. Simmons), a reclusive carpenter with a cabin full of handcrafted toys. With encouragement from various townspeople and a little bit of magic, an annual tradition builds up around this rotund, apple-cheeked stranger.
‘The Irishman’
Starts streaming: Nov. 27
Budgeted at a reported $159 million and running around three-and-a-half hours, Martin Scorsese’s gangster epic “The Irishman” may be Netflix’s biggest swing for the fences — and, judging by the film’s reception at the New York Film Festival, it appears to have connected. Working with Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci for the first time since 1995’s “Casino” — and with Al Pacino for the first time ever — Scorsese adapts Charles Brandt’s “I Heard You Paint Houses,” a memoir about Frank Sheeran (De Niro), a hit man who claimed to play a role in the disappearance of his friend, Jimmy Hoffa (Pacino). In this decades-spanning tale, deploying controversial “de-aging” technology, Scorsese reflects on what it means to grow old.
‘Atlantics’
Starts streaming: Nov. 29
Among a highly competitive Cannes competition slate in May, Mati Diop’s directorial debut won the Grand Prix, the equivalent of second prize, as Bong Joon Ho’s “Parasite” took the Palme D’Or. Long known to cinephiles as an actress in French films like “35 Shots of Rum” and “Simon Killer,” Diop continues in the tradition of her legendary Senegalese uncle, Djibril Diop Mambéty, whose “Touki Bouki” is an avant-garde classic of African cinema. “Atlantics” takes place outside Senegal’s largest city, Dakar, where construction workers on a coastal tower haven’t been paid in months. The workers decide to leave by sea, and one of them comes back to find his lover engaged to another man.
‘I Lost My Body’
Starts streaming: Nov. 29
Another big winner at Cannes 2019, this one in the Critics’ Week selection, the animated oddity “I Lost My Body” tells the surreal story of a severed hand that embarks on a wayward journey to reunite with its owner. Though the premise sounds macabre, the approach is more a lush dreamlike mystery, with the voiceless hand searching for the young boy who lost it and flashing back to memories when it was still attached. From that high-concept hook, the film liberates itself to explore the life of an orphaned Moroccan child in Paris and the adolescent romance that changes his fortunes.
‘We Are the Wave’
Starts streaming: Nov. 1
In this six-episode limited series from Germany, a cadre of high-school students decide to take action against the rising tide of nationalism that’s gripped the country socially and politically. Led by a charismatic yet mysterious new student (Ludwig Simon), the group wants to use activist stunts to trigger a larger movement across the country, but the bigger and more dangerous their ambitions get, the more their mission drifts away from them. “We Are the Wave” deals with the tensions and fractious relationships within the group, but also looks at what happens when a wave becomes a “tsunami,” and the group loses control over the direction it takes.
‘The Devil Next Door’
Starts streaming: Nov. 4
The latest Netflix true-crime documentary series unearths the controversial case of John Demjanjuk, a Cleveland grandfather who was known as a good family man and neighbor until the late 1970s, when the authorities accused him of being “Ivan the Terrible,” a notoriously vicious guard at Treblinka, a Nazi concentration camp in German-occupied Poland. On the strength of powerful testimonials from survivors, Demjanjuk was convicted as a war criminal in both Israel and the United States, but his guilt wasn’t as clear-cut as it might have seemed. “The Devil Next Door” scrutinizes both sides of the case and the complicated forces that affected justice.
‘The End of the F***ing World: Season 2’
Starts streaming: Nov. 5
The darkest of dark comedies, “The End of the F***ing World” never suggested a second season because the first — about the relationship between a 17-year-old self-proclaimed psychopath and the disaffected classmate he intends to murder — didn’t seem that open-ended. Yet the story of James (Alex Lawther) and Alyssa (Jessica Barden) left a loose end to tie up in season two, which brings in a homicidal new character named Bonnie (Naomi Ackie). It’s hard to guess where the series will go, since it’s run out of source material, but the creator Charlie Covell will try to pick up where Charles Forsman’s comic book left off and justify the extension.
‘Green Eggs and Ham’
Starts streaming: Nov. 8
How do you turn a Dr. Seuss book with 50 different words total into a 13-episode animated series? And does this mean a gritty live-action “Hop On Pop” is far behind? Dr. Seuss maintained tight control over the rights to his work while he was alive, but it’s been open season in the decades since, and “Green Eggs and Ham” happens to be a mostly untouched property. Netflix has invested heavily in the series, however, with Michael Douglas, Diane Keaton, Eddie Izzard, Tracy Morgan, Keegan-Michael Key, Daveed Diggs, John Turturro, Jeffrey Wright and Ilana Glazer all contributing voice work. Adam DeVine stars as Sam-I-Am, who embarks on a road trip to save an endangered animal.
‘I’m With the Band: Nasty Cherry’
Starts streaming: Nov. 15
Starting in 2000 on ABC with the boy-band producer (and later convicted scam artist) Lou Pearlman and continuing through three more seasons under P. Diddy’s watch on MTV, “Making the Band” used the music industry’s star-making machinery to produce ready-made pop groups like O-Town and Danity Kane. Now the wildly talented British singer Charli XCX is fronting a similar series called “I’m With the Band,” which chronicles the creation of the all-girl pop-punk quartet Nasty Cherry. Over six episodes, the show will document their origins, their time living together and the lead-up to their first performance, all unfolding before an eager fan base on Instagram.
‘The Crown: Season 3’
Starts streaming: Nov. 17
For the third season of Netflix’s hit show about Queen Elizabeth II and the drama behind the impeccable silken curtains, the estimable Olivia Colman takes over the role from Claire Foy, covering a challenging political era for the monarchy. Covering the period between 1963 and 1977, much of it ruled by Harold Wilson (Jason Watkins) as prime minister, “The Crown” will grapple with the disconnect between a country (and a world) undergoing radical change and a queen determined to hold it together through steadfast tradition. Elizabeth’s relationship to her sister Margaret (Helena Bonham Carter) takes on another dimension, too, when the princess’ marriage to Lord Snowdon breaks apart.
‘Mike Birbiglia: The New One’
Starts streaming: Nov. 26
After a successful run that lifted it from Off Broadway to Broadway proper, the humorist Mike Birbiglia’s one-man show “The New One” comes to Netflix, following his excellent 2017 special “Thank God for Jokes.” Birbiglia’s storytelling skills made him a fixture on “This American Life,” and “The New One” gives him the space to tell funny and touching anecdotes about his reluctance to become a father and the ambivalence that stayed with him now that he’s actually a parent.
Also of interest: “Holiday in the Wild” (Nov. 1), “Queer Eye: We’re in Japan!” (Nov. 1), “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri” (Nov. 1), “Zero Dark Thirty” (Nov. 1), “Seth Meyers: Lobby Baby” (Nov. 5), “Scams” (Nov. 6), “Let It Snow” (Nov. 6), “Patriot Act with Hassan Minhaj: Volume 5” (Nov. 10), “Jeff Garlin: Our Man in Chicago” (Nov. 12), “Maradona in Mexico” (Nov. 13), “The Knight Before Christmas” (Nov. 21), “Dolly Parton’s Heartstrings” (Nov. 22), “Holiday Rush” (Nov. 28)
