SYDNEY, Australia — Vice President Mike Pence assured Australian leaders on Saturday that the United States was committed to the countries’ “strong and historic alliance,” and he reaffirmed that the Trump adminstration would honor a refugee deal that President Trump disparaged in a January phone call with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull.
Mr. Pence is wrapping up an Asia-Pacific tour in which he has sought to affirm America’s commitment to the region after President Trump sent mixed signals to close allies, including Australia.
The tense phone call in late January between Mr. Trump and Mr. Turnbull set off a storm of criticism in Australia just as some in the country were calling for reconsidering its alliance with the United States and tilting more toward China.
During the call, Mr. Turnbull pressed Mr. Trump to honor an agreement, reached near the end of the Obama administration, to accept hundreds of refugees from Australian offshore detention centers. Mr. Trump abruptly ended the conversation and posted on Twitter that the agreement was a “dumb deal.”
On Saturday, Mr. Pence confirmed that the deal was still on. “Whatever reservations the president may have about the details of agreements reached by the prior administration, we’ll honor this agreement, out of respect for that enormously important alliance,” he said at a joint news conference with Mr. Turnbull in Sydney.
Mr. Turnbull said American officials had been on the Pacific islands of Nauru and Manus, where the detention centers are located, assessing refugees’ applications.
The two men also said their countries agreed China should do more to discourage North Korea’s nuclear arms development, though Mr. Pence praised Beijing for having taken “very welcome” steps recently to put economic pressure on Pyongyang.
Mr. Turnbull said Mr. Pence’s visit was the earliest ever by an American vice president to Australia in a new administration. “We recognize that that means more than ever your commitment to our alliance,” Mr. Turnbull said.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. did not come until 2016, as his tenure was nearing its end, although former President Barack Obama had paid a call sooner, in his third year in office.
“Pence is coming just three months into the administration, which is particularly noteworthy,” Dougal Robinson, a research fellow at the United States Studies Center at the University of Sydney, said before the vice president’s arrival in Australia. “After the Trump-Turnbull phone call, he’s clearly here to try and reassure Australian political leaders.”
Mr. Pence also met with Julie Bishop, the foreign minister, and Bill Shorten, the leader of the opposition Labor Party. He was scheduled to speak on Saturday with senior business leaders about the economic relationship between Australia and the United States.
“It’s about showing U.S. economic commitment to the region and to Australia after the collapse of the Trans-Pacific Partnership” trade deal, Mr. Robinson said.
James Carouso, the acting United States ambassador to Australia, said before Mr. Pence’s arrival that the visit was an effort to reassure Australians of the closeness between the countries and the value that America put on the relationship.
“This is something the new administration intends to work on going forward,” Mr. Carouso said.
