A Message From Turkey, a Nation Under Pressure
In the first of a series, our correspondent takes us behind the scenes of today’s Turkey, a nation in crisis facing a crackdown on rights.
Before I left to begin reporting for The New York Times in Turkey — a nation strained by war, terrorist insurgencies, a refugee crisis and a widening crackdown on dissent — Turkish diplomats in Washington sent me on my way with a velvet box.
I wasn’t sure what to expect when I opened it. Inside, I found a small gray stone with a card that described it as “a symbol of Turkey’s devotion to democracy.” 
That stone was a chunk of the Turkish Parliament building — blasted free by a bomb dropped by coup plotters in the army last summer. Since then, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s government has lashed out, purging tens of thousands of perceived opponents and coup plotters, firing or suspending about 130,000 government employees, and arresting more than 45,000 soldiers, police officers, teachers, politicians and journalists.
Given all that, I wondered if the rock was also a subtle warning to avoid straying from the government’s narrative of defending democracy. But that’s not possible in a country with so many competing agendas. This article is the first in a series in which I’ll try to show the difficult choices individuals here have to make as they get caught in the middle. 
For them, this is no abstract debate. They live in a place where everyday choices and even central points of identity — secular or pious, Turk or Kurd, citizen or refugee — can at times identify individuals as either loyal to President Erdogan’s agenda, or as part of the mistrusted opposition.
I had lived in Turkey before, for most of the past year, as I covered migration and refugee issues. In my recent reporting I’ve been struck by how the country’s long-term challenges and new crises have come together in this moment. 
The country is battling two separate terrorism campaigns (one led by secular Kurds, the other by Islamic State extremists) and two land wars (in southeast Turkey and northern Syria). It is hosting more displaced Syrians — around 2.75 million of them — than any other country except Syria itself. It is caught between growing tensions over Syria between its NATO allies on one side and its neighbor, Russia, on the other. And it is torn by its own internal debates over the role of Islam in society and over Mr. Erdogan’s tightening grip on the state. 
That last question is rising to its apex now. In less than a month, Turkish voters will be asked in a referendum whether to hand Mr. Erdogan even more sweeping authority. 
In a country where citizens disagree on even the most basic interpretation of Mr. Erdogan’s actions — is he desperately defending a country under siege or cynically maneuvering to seize more power? — everyday decisions have become strained, full of political import and potential hazard. 
Should a teacher struggling through a widespread purge of educators voice her concerns about damage to the school system, and risk being purged herself? Can a neighborhood leader reconcile his sacrifice to defend democracy during the coup with the government’s crackdown on democratic freedoms? Why must a Syrian boy give up any permanent address, and risk arrest, in the hope of finding work? 
Please join me as I seek out the people and stories that can lend insight into how this country is navigating a perilous moment in its history, and as I try to piece together a puzzle that keeps changing before our eyes. 
