At U.N. General Assembly, Signing a Nuclear Pact and Debating Another
Nuclear weapons were the focus as global leaders addressed the United Nations General Assembly on Wednesday, a day after President Trump vowed to “totally destroy” North Korea if it threatened the United States or its allies.
Leaders from around the globe began adding their signatures to a treaty that bans nuclear weapons, although the world’s nine nuclear-armed countries declined to sign it and denounced it as dangerously naïve.
President Hassan Rouhani of Iran, responding to Mr. Trump’s denunciation of the Iran nuclear deal as “an embarrassment,” defended the agreement in his own remarks to the General Assembly on Wednesday. Mr. Rouhani said the agreement could be “a new model for global interactions.”
• Sign up for the Morning Briefing for United Nations news and a regular look at what you need to know to begin your day.
Federica Mogherini, the European Union’s top foreign official, who led a 90-minute meeting on Wednesday of the parties that negotiated the Iran nuclear agreement, said bluntly afterward that everyone in the room, including the United States, had agreed that Iran was complying with its obligations. She warned of the risks of reopening negotiations, as some Trump administration officials have suggested.
She did not answer a question about whether the United States was committed to staying in the accord.
“The international community cannot afford dismantling an agreement that is working and delivering,” she told reporters outside the United Nations Security Council chamber.
Referring to North Korea’s nuclear program, Ms. Mogherini also said: “We already have one potential nuclear crisis. We definitely don’t need to go into a second one. This is an agreement that prevented a nuclear program and potentially prevented military intervention. Lets not forget that.”
“There is no need to renegotiate parts of the agreement because the agreement is working,” she added.
She spoke after the foreign ministers of six countries — Britain, China, France, Germany, Russia and the United States — had met along with their Iranian counterpart, Mohammad Javad Zarif.
Ms. Mogherini insisted that the European Union would ensure that the accord stayed in place. “As Europeans, we will make sure the agreement stays.”
Asked whether the Trump administration would quit the agreement, Ms. Mogherini said the accord belonged to no single country. “It’s not for one party or the other to certify this,” she said, noting that only the International Atomic Energy Agency had that responsibility.
“There are other issues that are out of the scope of the agreement and issues might be tackled in different formats, different fora.”
Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson represented the United States; Nikki R. Haley, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, was also in the room. She left without taking questions.
— SOMINI SENGUPTA
Daniel Ortega, the president of Nicaragua, has announced that his country would sign the Paris Agreement on climate change, a decision that will leave the United States and Syria as the only nations not part of the global accord.
The move came as the Trump administration has been sending mixed signals about whether it will abandon or remain in the pact of nearly 200 nations to curb greenhouse gases. It also comes as other leaders attending the United Nations General Assembly this week pledged to support the climate change goals.
Nicaragua initially objected to the Paris agreement because, its negotiators said, it did not compel rich countries to do enough to cut carbon emissions or to pay for the damages caused by climate change.
But in an announcement first reported by El Nuevo Diario, a Nicaraguan newspaper, on Monday, Mr. Ortega reversed course, saying he would sign the accord to help protect the most vulnerable countries.
“We have to be in solidarity with this large number of countries that are the first victims, who are already the victims and are the ones who will continue to suffer the impact of these disasters and which are countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America, of the Caribbean, which are in highly vulnerable areas,” he said according to a translation of his statement.
— LISA FRIEDMAN
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan staunchly defended the Trump administration on North Korea during his address to the United Nations, saying that now was not the time for dialogue.
“We consistently support the stance of the United States that all options are on the table” to stop North Korea’s nuclear ambitions, Mr. Abe said.
For North Korea, he said, “dialogue was the best means of deceiving us and buying time.”
In the past month, North Korea has twice fired missile tests over Japan. The Japanese have limited missile defenses, and the country’s position to the east of North Korea means that missiles fired by Pyongyang toward the United States, including Guam, almost certainly would have to fly over Japanese territory.
“Again and again, attempts to resolve the issue through dialogue have all come to nought,” Mr. Abe said.
He called North Korea’s leader, Kim Jung-un, “a dictator” and said that “sooner or later” Mr. Kim would be able to deliver an intercontinental ballistic missile.
“North Korea is attempting to dismiss with a smirk efforts towards disarmament we have assiduously undertaken over the years,” Mr. Abe said. “The nonproliferation regime is about to suffer a serious blow from its most confident disrupter ever.”
— SOMINI SENGUPTA
Speaking to the General Assembly on Wednesday, President Hassan Rouhani of Iran praised the nuclear deal with his country as a “model” and slammed President Trump.
Pledging that Iran would not be the first to “violate” the nuclear deal, Mr. Rouhani made a sideswipe at President Trump, saying, “It will be a great pity if this agreement were to be destroyed by rogue newcomers to the world of politics.”
He argued that the Middle East was safer because of the pact, and said the harsh rhetoric from the Trump administration “undermines international confidence in negotiating with it.”
“Imagine for a moment how the Middle East would have looked had the J.C.P.O.A. not been concluded.” Mr. Rouhani said, using an acronym for the pact. He also singled out “baseless” allegations made on Tuesday at the General Assembly, without naming anyone.
The nuclear deal, Mr. Rouhani said, has been widely applauded and endorsed by the Security Council. “As such it belongs to the international community in its entirety and not only to one or two countries,” he said, adding that the agreement “can be a new model for global interactions.”
A tweet sent from Mr. Rouhani’s official account also took aim at Trump’s speech.
He also said that American taxpayers should ask why billions of dollars spent in the region had not advanced peace but has only brought “war, misery, poverty” and a “rise of extremism.”
Mr. Rouhani followed his United Nations speech about an hour later with an hourlong news conference, in which he denounced what he called Mr. Trump’s “completely baseless allegations” about Iran, demanded an apology and said the Iran nuclear agreement was final and could not be amended, reopened or renegotiated.
— SOMINI SENGUPTA and RICK GLADSTONE
Leaders and diplomats from dozens of countries signed a treaty at the United Nations on Wednesday that will outlaw nuclear weapons — a document that disarmament advocates described as a historic first.
The world’s nine nuclear-armed countries, including the United States and North Korea, declined to sign the treaty, and the Americans and their allies denounced it as dangerously naïve.
The treaty, finalized in July by negotiators representing 120 of the 193 United Nations members, offered a stark contrast to the threats of mutual nuclear annihilation raised in the bombastic exchanges between North Korea’s regime and the Trump administration in recent weeks.
The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, as it is officially known, will enter into legal force 90 days after being ratified by 50 countries.
“The treaty is an important step toward the universally held goal of a world free of nuclear weapons,” Secretary General António Guterres, who supported the negotiations, said at the ceremony held in the Trusteeship Council chamber.
President Michel Temer of Brazil was the first to formally sign the treaty, as other leaders and diplomats in the chamber applauded.
The United States and the other nuclear-armed states urged other countries not to sign it. The Americans in particular ridiculed it, arguing that North Korea and any other rogue entity with nuclear weapons would ignore its provisions.
In a statement issued before the signing ceremony, NATO denounced the treaty, saying it “disregards the realities of the increasingly challenging security environment.”
Supporters of the treaty said they had no expectation that nuclear-armed states would accept it at first. But they said they hoped that it would eventually increase the stigma of possessing such weapons because of their destructive power.
“This treaty is a clear indication that the majority of the world no longer accepts nuclear weapons and do not consider them legitimate weapons, creating the foundation of a new norm,” the International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons said in a statement.
The treaty would outlaw the use, threat of use, testing, development, production, possession, transfer and stationing in a different country of nuclear weapons.
— RICK GLADSTONE
President Trump is devoting his third day of international diplomacy in New York to a series of individual meetings with foreign leaders on Wednesday, mainly from the Arab world, as he seeks to rally a coalition in the Middle East against Iran.
He started on Wednesday morning by getting together with King Abdullah II of Jordan, who has met with Mr. Trump several times already, including an encounter shortly after the inauguration when the king attended a Washington prayer breakfast to lobby the president not to move the United States embassy to Jerusalem.
The two expressed friendship on Wednesday. Mr. Trump praised the king for hosting so many Syrian refugees in his country and for combating terrorism. “He’s a very fine gentleman, a very nice man,” Mr. Trump told reporters at the start of the meeting. “He’s also a great, great fighter.”
The king expressed solidarity. “We’re all fighting together,” he said, adding that terrorism “is a scourge” around the world. “Jordan will always stand beside you and your country.”
Mr. Trump will meet later in the day with Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain and President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt. He also will host a luncheon with African leaders.
– PETER BAKER
President Trump on Wednesday reaffirmed his commitment to brokering peace between Israelis and Palestinians despite widespread doubts, pledging to devote “everything within my heart” to succeed where presidents have failed for generations.
“I think we have a pretty good shot, maybe the best shot ever,” Mr. Trump said as he met with Mr. Abbas at a New York hotel.
Mr. Trump acknowledged that it was a “complex subject” and “the toughest deal of all,” but vowed to invest his political energy to making it happen. “I will do everything within my heart and within my soul to get that deal made,” he said.
The Palestinians have expressed skepticism about Mr. Trump’s initiative, raising the prospect that they would give up on the effort. But seated beside Mr. Trump on Wednesday, Mr. Abbas said he appreciated “the seriousness of your excellency, Mr. President, to achieve the deal of the century.”
“This gives us the assurance and the confidence that we are on the verge of real peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis,” Mr. Abbas said.
— PETER BAKER
Mr. Abbas, in his General Assembly address, accused Israel of feeding “religious animosity” by imposing restrictions on Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem and undermining prospects for a Palestinian state.
He also vaguely warned of consequences. If a two-state solution is replaced with one state occupying another, he said, “neither you nor we will have any other choice but to continue the struggle.”
“This is not a threat,” he added, “but a warning of the realities before us as a result of ongoing Israeli policies that are gravely undermining the two-state solution.”
Mr. Abbas spoke to the General Assembly shortly after his meeting with President Trump, whom he praised for emphasizing peace in the Middle East.
The Palestinian leader alluded to that meeting only briefly in his speech, thanking Mr. Trump for his efforts to work out a peace deal. The Trump administration has not yet put up any specific proposal.
Mr. Abbas’s speech came after an important deal reached with his Palestinian rivals, Hamas. They announced over the weekend that they would hand him the keys to governing the Gaza Strip and disband a shadow government that was set up earlier this year.
He saved his ire for Israel.
“Don’t ever try to go to a religious war,” Mr. Abbas said. “It’s really dangerous for you and for us. Our conflict is political.”
It was an apparent reference to the crisis over the contested Al Aqsa Mosque compound, which is revered by both Jews and Muslims.
Mr. Abbas warned vaguely that the Israeli authorities would have to take responsibility for governing Palestinian territories — a prospect that Israel eschews.
“We cannot remain an Authority without any authority,” he said. “If they don’t want a two-state solution and if they don’t want peace, let them bear the responsibility.”
President Trump’s threat to destroy North Korea provoked a debate among scholars of international law about whether he had violated a tenet of the United Nations Charter.
Article 2(4) of the Charter says that countries should “refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force” against another country, and grants exceptions only for instances sanctioned by the Security Council or acts of self-defense.
In this case, there was no authorization from the Security Council, so the question is: Was Mr. Trump justified on the basis of self-defense?
John B. Bellinger III, who served as a legal adviser in the administration of George W. Bush, said that despite his “colorful” choice of words, Mr. Trump was on solid ground, invoking the self-defense argument.
“His threat to destroy North Korea did not violate the U.N. Charter because he said that the United States would use force only ‘if the United States is forced to defend itself or its allies,’ ” Mr. Bellinger said by email. “The Charter specifically allows a U.N. member to use force in self-defense.”
Kevin Jon Heller, a law professor at the University of London, said he believed that Mr. Trump had overstepped.
“The problem is that self-defense must always be proportionate to the armed attack, and Trump clearly threatened disproportionate force,” Mr. Heller argued. “Had he said a nuclear attack would require wiping North Korea off the face of the earth, that might have been a lawful threat. But he did not qualify the threat in any way; on the contrary, he suggested North Korea would have to be destroyed in response to any armed attack on the U.S. or its allies. That is an unlawful threat that violates Art. 2(4).”
— SOMINI SENGUPTA
