U.K. Police Arrest 3 More Over Parsons Green Attack
LONDON — Three people have been arrested in a 24-hour period in Wales in connection with the terrorist attack at a London Tube station that briefly sowed panic on the city’s transport system last week, the police said on Wednesday, bringing the number of people in custody to five.
Scotland Yard said two men, ages 48 and 30, were arrested on Wednesday under counterterrorism laws in Newport, a university city in southeast Wales not far from Cardiff, as part of the investigation into the attack that injured at least 30 people.
The arrests came a day after the police said they had detained a 25-year-old man in Wales over the attack, the fifth major assault in Britain this year and the fourth in London.
The Islamic State militant group said after the attack that a “detachment” of its fighters had been behind it. The authorities are trying to piece together the events leading up to the bombing, to ascertain whether those involved had been influenced by extremists, and whether they had acted alone or were part of a wider network.
“This continues to be a fast-moving investigation — a significant amount of activity has taken place since the attack on Friday,” Cmdr. Dean Haydon, who leads the Counterterrorism Command at the Metropolitan Police said in a statement. “We now have five men in custody and searches are continuing at four addresses. Detectives are carrying out extensive inquiries to determine the full facts behind the attack.”
The bombing prompted the British authorities to briefly raise the terrorism threat to the highest possible level, and Commander Haydon asked the public to come forward with any information they might have and to be vigilant for anything that could suggest a terrorist threat.
“We are asking the public to look out for anything that seems out of place, unusual or just doesn’t seem to fit in with day-to-day life,” he said. “It may be nothing, but if you see or hear anything that could be terrorist-related, trust your instincts, then act, and call us.”
On Saturday, Sunbury-on-Thames, a suburb southwest of London, was shaken after the police arrested two men in connection with the attack: An 18-year-old Iraqi orphan who had a reputation for getting into fights and had been in the foster care of a retired couple, and a 21-year-old from Syria who had escaped the civil war there and was working at a fried-chicken shop.
The 18-year-old, who has not been publicly identified, was arrested Saturday morning in the departures area at the port of Dover, where he appeared to be trying to leave the country.
The 21-year-old, who was arrested outside Aladdin’s, the shop in the outer London borough of Hounslow where he worked, has been identified as Yahyah Farroukh.
In an interview, his brother said that their family had run a bakery in Damascus, Syria, and that Yahyah had opposed President Bashar al-Assad.
