SYDNEY, Australia — Australia’s health minister has taken an abrupt leave of absence after purchasing an investment beachfront property while on a taxpayer-funded trip, prompting calls for her dismissal and the possibility of a cabinet reshuffle.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said on Monday that Sussan Ley, the minister for health, aged care and sport, would forgo her ministerial salary during an investigation into her use of publicly funded travel while on private business in Queensland.
The move comes at a time of low approval ratings for the Turnbull government.
“I expect the highest standards from my ministers in all aspects of their conduct, and especially the expenditure of public money,” Mr. Turnbull said in a statement on Monday, adding that Australians expected the government to review taxpayer-funded spending “very thoroughly.”
“The minister has agreed to stand aside without ministerial pay” until an investigation is completed, he said. Ms. Ley also said that the Finance Department would review her travel records.
Ms. Ley’s district is in the south of New South Wales, and she owns a home there, in the city of Albury. The property she purchased while on ministerial business in Brisbane, Queensland, was bought for nearly $600,000 in May 2015. It is an apartment on the northern reaches of the Gold Coast and has ocean views.
Ms. Ley said that it was a snap decision to buy the property, one she is unlikely to live in, and she apologized for an “error of judgment” in charging taxpayers for the trip, which cost the public almost $3,000.
“She is traveling all the time as a senior minister,” said John Wanna, a political analyst at Australian National University in Canberra. “But Australians get very upset when they perceive that public office has been used for private profit. Some politicians have a sense of entitlement about how public money can be spent.”
Penny Wong, a senator from the opposition Labor Party, said that Mr. Turnbull should remove Ms. Ley from the cabinet. “This has been another weak response from a weak prime minister,” she said.
The news comes as property prices are rising in many parts of Australia and young people are struggling to afford homes. Kristina Keneally, a former leader of the state of New South Wales, said on Twitter that while a bag of candy might qualify as an unexpected purchase, an investment property would not.
The apartment was sold in 2002 for about $330,000 and was worth more than $600,000 four years later. Tourism, a lower Australian dollar and interest from foreign buyers have kept the Gold Coast property market buoyant, said Pete Wargent, a property analyst with AllenWargent Property Buyers.
Other Australian politicians have faced criticism for using public money for private purposes. Bronwyn Bishop, a former House speaker, resigned in 2015 after she billed taxpayers for a helicopter ride to a Liberal Party event, and former Prime Minister Tony Abbott was sharply criticized for billing taxpayers while taking part in charity events including a long-distance bike ride and an Ironman competition.
Ms. Ley said she was confident she had not broken rules on the use of taxpayer funds. She said attending an auction to buy the property was not the reason for the trip to Queensland, where she had made an announcement about new medicines available to treat breast cancer and met with patients in Brisbane and on the Gold Coast.
“I have spoken to the prime minister, and this claim does not meet the high standards he expects of ministers,” she said, referring to the claim she submitted for expenses on the trip. “I apologize for the error of judgment.”
Ms. Ley said that she would repay two other claims for accommodation on the Gold Coast. Expenses incurred for a flight from the Gold Coast to Canberra, Australia’s capital, will also be reviewed.
Australia’s Parliament is on summer recess until Feb. 7. Mr. Turnbull is expected to come under pressure to review his cabinet soon after lawmakers return. He narrowly won a July election, holding the government with a one-seat majority in the lower house, and has struggled to gain traction with policy proposals.
His treasurer, Scott Morrison, delivered a midyear budget in December that was widely embraced. But broader issues, including tax policy and a vote for a plebiscite on gay marriage, have either moved slowly or been voted down, leading to the government’s poor polling among voters.
The government also faced criticism before Christmas over letters sent to welfare recipients who may have been inadvertently overpaid. The letters, automatically generated by Australia’s Taxation Office, sometimes overstated the debt owed or were sent to people who owed no money.
“He has trouble getting policy through his own party,” said Mr. Wanna, the political analyst. He added that a culture of entitlement and a view that “quite a few politicians are mean” would not engender them to voters.
The Australian, a leading daily, reported on an opinion poll on Monday that found Mr. Turnbull and the opposition leader Bill Shorten to be the least popular leaders in more than 20 years.
