So This One Time, I Overheard...
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
When The New York Times began its Metropolitan Diary feature in 1976, Jimmy Carter was about to become president, the threat of nuclear war felt real and New York was struggling with a shrinking population.
The Metropolitan Diary was a tonic, a daily series of reader-contributed anecdotes, conversations and observations that were sly and sassy, funny and sometimes touching.
It’s still one of our most popular features in print and this week, we started to think: What might an Australian (21st-century digital) version look like?
We posted a call for vignettes in our subscriber Facebook group, thinking there could be an interesting video feature in all of this, and received a few potential gems.
Phyllis Gorman, a former New Yorker, offered up a tale of coffee and that day’s commute:
Alison Lowe, in addition to sharing her experience observing the MAMIL (middle-aged man in Lycra) walking in a wet suit with a surfboard in the suburbs, shared another good bus story:
These stories fit well within the Metropolitan Diary mission laid out by one of its early editors, Ron Alexander, who emphasized that the Diary entries should be about particular moments. They’re stories that do not insult or exaggerate but rather — quickly, and with wit — capture the zeitgeist and tell us about our lives.
Buses and trains, of course, are only a few of the possible settings. Some of my favorite entries involve acts of urban kindness on the streets, or youthful gaffes at parties — such as the time a young woman in publishing got up the nerve to talk to Salman Rushdie at a party, yielding an unexpected laugh about “The Satanic Verses.”
A Melbourne, Brisbane, Sydney, Darwin, Perth or Alice Springs story would inevitably have its own particular vibe. Australia, after all, is a country with a population that’s both spread across a vast landmass and concentrated in cities and suburbs. The particulars of each Dear Diary entry would inevitably yield both shades of difference and universal human themes.
So let’s give it a shot.
If you have a telling anecdote you’d like to submit, email it to nytaustralia@nytimes.com. Borrowing and adapting the Metropolitan Diary guidelines, here are a few things to keep in mind:
• Written submissions should be connected with where you live and should be 300 words or fewer (200 words or fewer is fine).
• See a sign lost in translation? Take a photo. Want to share a sketch of your missed connection? Draw it for us. Photos, illustrations and short videos or other visuals accompanied by a text blurb are welcome.
• An editor will contact you if your entry has been accepted or if we want to turn it into a video, and you must be able to verify that you are the author of the story, that it is true (in most cases, that means you were there when it happened) and that your item has not appeared anywhere else.
• Please include your name, location and a daytime telephone number for verification; upon request, names may be withheld in print. Your phone number and email address will not be published.
If you get the urge, don’t be shy about telling friends about this newsletter and our call for submissions. There may be a small prize involved for those whose stories are selected.
For a dose of daily news from The New York Times, don’t forget to sign up for our always-evolving Morning Briefing: Australia Edition, which arrives by email each morning.
Now, on to the week’s news and features, plus some music recommendations from readers.
______
Australia This Week
We’ll be closely following the court decision expected Thursday afternoon on the postal plebiscite for same-sex marriage. Last week, we explained what’s really going on with that television ad pushing for a “no” vote. This week, we explored why the Yarra City Council decided to stop celebrating Australia Day. And we profiled New Zealand’s up-and-coming political star, Jacinda Ardern, with a story from Wellington.
In Opinion, Julia Baird argued for more statues of accomplished women and Waleed Aly also wrote for us about Australia’s dual-citizenship conflict, opening with this memorable line: “Is it possible for a constitutional crisis to be funny? I give you Australia.”
______
The North
Tensions with North Korea have escalated again, with the North saying it detonated a hydrogen bomb. That’s probably a stretch; we explained why. We also explored what North Korea’s latest act of defiance means for China’s plans to dominate the region. We described the impact on the stock markets. And we identified a possible landslide caused by the blast.
______
Burnout Avoidance
Feeling burned out at work? Like you’re life is out of balance? Here’s how to diagnose and fix the problem. And don’t worry, you’re not alone: This was among our top reads in Australia this week.
______
