SYDNEY, Australia — A long-awaited national survey on sexual assault and harassment at Australian universities — the first of its kind in the country — has revealed that young women are experiencing what victims’ advocates describe as “shocking levels” of sexual violence on campuses across this country, prompting a range of new measures by officials to tackle the problem.
The report, released on Tuesday by the government’s Human Rights Commission, shows that 51 percent of all university students were sexually harassed at least once in 2016. It also shows that more than 2,000 students, or 6.9 percent of those surveyed, were sexually assaulted at least once in 2015 or 2016 and that in the vast majority of cases, neither the victim nor bystanders reported the episode.
“We are sorry that this happened to you. Sexual assault is a crime,” said Margaret Gardner, the chairwoman of Universities Australia, an association of the country’s universities, which helped finance the survey. “Through your stories you call on us and on every fellow student and member of staff to do more to prevent others from ever experiencing the damage,” she said.
“We cannot take away the pain that you have felt and that you feel,” she added. “But we acknowledge it and we can respond to that pain with compassion and care.”
The report had been widely anticipated, and its release will no doubt intensify Australia’s national conversation about the prevalence of sexual violence and its impact. The findings, drawn from a survey of more than 30,000 students at 39 Australian universities, map the full extent of the problem and largely confirm the accusations of victims and advocates who have been arguing for years that Australian universities have underestimated the severity of the sexual harassment and assault, and failed to adequately respond with support for victims and punishment for perpetrators.
“This report marks a huge milestone,” Kate Jenkins, Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, said at a news conference. “For decades, university students and survivors of sexual assault and sexual harassment have advocated for change. We have all heard stories of these behaviors occurring on campus. Today, we have the first statistically significant, national data on the scale and nature of this problem at Australia’s universities.”
After the release of the report, the commission and Universities Australia made several recommendations regarding prevention, the response to accusations and specialized training for staff members.
The report showed that students often do not disclose sexual assaults to the police, university administrations or other formal reporting bodies, instead confiding in friends, tutors or lecturers, advocates say. But these people are rarely trained to respond to such disclosures, prompting a new set of recommendations to provide them with specialized training.
“We know that the way a disclosure of sexual assault is handled in the very first instance can make all the difference to the recovery of the victim or survivor,” said Belinda Robinson, the chief executive of Universities Australia.
But the problems go beyond just the official response, to deeply ingrained behaviors reflecting what experts have long described as a culture of hypermasculinity and privilege. The report found, for example, that bisexual students, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students, and students with a disability were all more likely to be harassed and assaulted than other students.
The report also found that it was not just victims who did not report the episodes; bystanders also stayed silent.
“The most common reasons bystanders did not take any action were that they did not think it was serious enough to intervene or that they did not know what to do,” the report said.
More results from the survey are expected to trickle out over the next day as news outlets work to compile and compare statistics from universities, which will publicly release data on rates of sexual assault and harassment at their institutions.
The New York Times reported in June that over the past year Australia had been grappling with campus assaults and reprisals against victims. Some universities have been slow to discipline perpetrators; some provide access to counselors, though not necessarily with specialized training in sexual assault; and education around the issue varies from campus to campus.
A January report by the advocacy group End Rape on Campus Australia found that universities had frequently failed to support victims of sexual assault and harassment. And while the problem is global, each new scandal in Australia has prompted more women to speak out.
Nina Funnell, a victims’ advocate, said the commission’s findings did not come as a surprise to advocacy groups.
“What the report shows is as expected: Young women in Australia are experiencing shocking levels of sexual violence within universities,” Ms. Funnell said. “In the majority of cases, the perpetrators are known to them, and those who live in residential facilities are more likely to experience and are more at risk of experiencing sexual assault than those who are day students.”
“We’ve known for decades that these have been the prevailing trends,” she added. “However, now we have the data to back up our assertions.”
In the days leading up to the report’s release, victims of sexual assault and harassment from around the country stood outside their universities holding signs detailing how they thought their institutions had failed them.
Some of the signs also offered support for victims.
Many female students said they feared that in the coming weeks, their voices could be drowned out by university leaders working to protect their institutions’ reputations.
“Here’s what the University of Adelaide’s response to my rape cost me,” Matilda Duncan’s sign read. “My degree, the chance to graduate. My career. My education. My health and happiness. Friends, trust, confidence, curiosity and hope.” Ms. Duncan submitted a complaint to the commission about an accusation that she said forced her to drop out of the university.
The photo campaign, splashed across the pages of major news outlets in Australia, was organized by End Rape on Campus Australia and modeled on Project Unbreakable, an American photo campaign in which victims of sexual assault held placards of what their perpetrators said to them following an assault.
“Behind every one of those statistics there is a real person who has experienced that violence,” said Ms. Funnell, who led the campaign. “We did the campaign to put a human face on the issue so that the voices and experiences of students and survivors are not lost in the data.”
