New Zealand’s political opposition was jolted by an abrupt change at the top on Tuesday as the Labour Party leader quit amid dismal polling numbers and a rising star, Jacinda Ardern, took over just weeks before a general election.
Ms. Ardern, 37, has been seen as leadership material since she became Parliament’s youngest sitting member at age 28. But with the New Zealand election campaign already in full swing, and the face of her predecessor, Andrew Little, still on the billboards, Ms. Ardern joked to reporters Tuesday morning that she had just accepted “the worst job in politics.”
Mr. Little nominated Ms. Ardern, previously his deputy, to replace him after two polls this week showed support for the left-leaning Labour Party hitting just 24 percent, its lowest level in decades.
Ms. Ardern said she would run a “relentlessly optimistic” campaign, despite the perils of taking over so close to an election, while Labour’s numbers are at rock bottom.
She said she would move quickly to put her own stamp on the party and help Labour run “the campaign of our lives.” Ms. Ardern said she would take the next 72 hours to take stock of the party before announcing its new direction for the final weeks of campaigning. The election is set for Sept. 23.
Mr. Little had led the Labour Party since November 2014, but he had failed to make headway in the polls against a long-serving National Party-led government, and support for Labour had steadily declined over the last six weeks.
“We’ve not been able to get our message out about the things that actually matter,” Mr. Little said, talking about the “disturbing and disappointing” polls.
Doubts over Mr. Little’s leadership had grown over the last 24 hours after he admitted in a Radio New Zealand interview that he had to take responsibility for the party’s dismal polling and had considered resigning. He said senior Labour members had told him not to.
But at Tuesday’s Labour Party caucus meeting he did just that, despite insisting just hours earlier that he would not step down.
Labour has been plagued by leadership woes since Helen Clark, the former prime minister, lost her last general election in 2008. Since then, Labour has cycled through five leaders, including Mr. Little, with none managing to make a significant dent in the popularity of John Key, the long-serving prime minister from the National Party.
Mr. Key resigned in 2016, saying he didn’t have another term in him, effectively handing the prime ministership to his deputy, Bill English.
But the Labour Party continued to struggle; in June, it was embroiled in controversy involving an internship scheme in which young volunteers from around the world had arrived in New Zealand to work, unpaid, to help the Labour campaign. Some of the interns complained to the news media about their living conditions.
In New Zealand’s parliamentary system, parties outside the two largest typically build coalitions to support the government so it can pass legislation. In the last month, the Green Party has been rising in the polls to 15 percent support as Labour has been on the decline.
The results suggest the Greens have been the beneficiaries of Labour’s disarray.
