Hope and Frustration in Australia as Gay Marriage Debate Nears
SYDNEY, Australia — Unlike the United States, Canada and New Zealand, Australia stands out as a developed, English-speaking country that has not legalized same-sex marriage.
But a new survey shows Australian attitudes on the issue are rapidly changing, suggesting it is Parliament that is falling behind international peers in recognizing gay marriage.
From 2005 to 2015, there was a shift toward the view that gay couples should have the same marriage, parenting and employment rights as heterosexual couples, according to the University of Melbourne’s annual survey of household, income and labor dynamics in Australia.
The proportion of women supporting such rights for gay couples rose to 67 percent in 2015 from 43 percent in 2005. Among men, the proportion who agreed rose to 59 percent from 32 percent.
Meanwhile, divisions over gay marriage are widening within the conservative Australian government. Dean Smith, an openly gay senator from the governing Liberal Party, has drafted a bill to legalize same-sex marriage, which could be put before Parliament this month.
We spent a day around Sydney’s Oxford Street, a historically gay area where the annual Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras is held, to speak to people in the city’s L.G.B.T. community and find out how they feel about the prospect of Australia’s marriage laws being changed.
Mitch Edwards, property flipper, 54
Mr. Edwards had previously been married for 15 years.
“I didn’t go into a straight marriage with the self-recognition I was gay. I was in denial because I was conforming to society’s wishes.
“I’ve been with my partner for 12 years. And our relationship is equal to other relationships. And we are good, law-abiding citizens who should be given the same opportunities as every citizen. And yet, people who are not good, law-abiding citizens of the nation have rights that we don’t have.
“It’s embarrassing that Australia is considered one of the gay capitals of the world and we’re very open-minded, and yet we discriminate against who has the right, who doesn’t.
“I’d like to see some of the people who are making these decisions tell one of their children that they don’t have the same rights as one of their brothers and or sisters. I just think it’s a joke.
“Within five years, eventually the politicians have got to be embarrassed enough to make something happen.”
Charity Turner, small-business owner, 33
“I came from a strict religious background. My parents are pastors of the Southside Christian Fellowship.
“It wasn’t until I fell in love that all the concerns I had on same-sex relationships were really challenged and made me understand that love can quite simply be love between two people.”
That relationship, with a woman she met at her parents’ church, lasted nine years before Ms. Turner met her current partner, Phoebe. They’ve been together four years. 
“My parents first and foremost don’t agree with same-sex relationships, let alone their youngest one marrying another woman. I come from that similar background myself, thinking that marriage of the same gender wasn’t right. I guess a large part of that is Australian law reflects that religious attitude, that same-sex marriage isn’t right.”
Giving up on waiting for a gay marriage law in Australia, Ms. Turner and her wife married in New Zealand in November last year. 
“We spent in excess of $35,000 on the wedding. We would have loved to have had our wedding here in Australia. My wife’s grandfather was too elderly and sick to attend our wedding. He’s from a generation where same-sex marriage and same-sex relations have a massive stigma, and he wanted to be there. He passed away the day before we got married.
“The actual community is gaining traction in terms of openness, and it’s just legislators that need to catch up.”
Elaine Czulkowski, fund-raising manager for Australian Marriage Equality, 57
“I’ve been inv
