Jacinda Ardern Takes Over as Kiwi Opposition Leader. So Why Ask Her About Babies?
Less than a day into her tenure as leader of New Zealand’s opposition, Jacinda Ardern was twice asked to explain her decision on whether to have children, a personal question she said none of her male colleagues would have to answer.
Ms. Ardern, 37, said she was willing to answer questions about how she balanced work and family life, an issue she has spoken about publicly in the past, but said on Wednesday, “In this day and age, that doesn’t mean that any other woman should be open to those questions.”
In two interviews in 24 hours with New Zealand news outlets, Ms. Arden defended the rights of women to work without speculation over their personal decision to have children, or not. Her reactions to the men interviewing her enlivened the public debate over the double standards faced by men and women in the workplace.
In an appearance on Wednesday on the radio program “The AM Show,” Ms. Ardern said that asking a woman in a professional context if she planned to get pregnant was “totally unacceptable.”
She was responding to a comment by the columnist and former cricketer Mark Richardson, who said earlier in the program that employers had the “right” to know if their female employees planned to have children, adding it was a “legitimate question” for Ms. Ardern if she sought to become prime minister.
“The question is, is it O.K. for a P.M. to take maternity leave while in office?” Mr. Richardson said.
Another male host said, “What about this whole question of work, babies, family?”
Ms. Ardern said that while she was comfortable discussing her plans, no woman should be expected to detail for an employer whether she planned to become pregnant.
“For other women, it is totally unacceptable in 2017 to say that women should have to answer that question in the workplace,” Ms. Ardern said, pointing her finger at Mr. Richardson. “That is unacceptable.”
That was the second time in two days that Ms. Ardern was asked about her plans for children.
On Tuesday night, hours after she was announced as the youngest leader in the history of the country’s Labour Party, she was asked by another male broadcaster if, at her age, she felt she had to make a choice between having babies and having a career.
Ms. Ardern replied that she had no problem with being asked the question, and said it was a “dilemma” she and many other women faced.
Others in New Zealand were less tolerant of what they perceived to be unequal treatment.
Some pointed out that Mr. Richardson’s statement that employers had the right to know if their employees planned to have children was, unsurprisingly, false. Under the country’s Human Rights Act of 1993, it is illegal for an employer to discriminate against an employee over her decision to become pregnant.
The former prime minister of New Zealand, Helen Clark, denounced the questions on Twitter, calling them “gender-based attacks.”
In the halls of Parliament on Wednesday, several other leaders echoed Ms. Clark’s sentiment.
“I just think it’s a sexist, stupid comment to make and it’s just, there’s no place for it in 2017,” the deputy Labour leader, Kelvin Davis, told a crowd of reporters gathered at the Parliament building.
“It’s entirely her business,” Prime Minister Bill English told the same group.
Ms. Ardern has been a rising star in New Zealand politics after becoming the youngest member of Parliament at 28. She was chosen to lead the opposition just weeks before a general election in an effort to boost support for the Labour Party, which is currently trailing Mr. English’s National Party.
If successful, she could become the country’s third female prime minister.
