Boris Johnson Cancels Moscow Visit, Citing Events in Syria
In a surprise announcement on Saturday, Britain’s foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, said that because of the situation in Syria, he had canceled a long-delayed official visit to Moscow that was to begin on Monday.
“Developments in Syria have changed the situation fundamentally,” Mr. Johnson said in a statement. “My priority is now to continue contact with the U.S. and others in the run up to the G7 meeting on 10-11 April,” which will take place in Italy.
The visit to Russia would have been the first by a British foreign secretary in five years, and it had already been postponed once, to accommodate the schedule of the American secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson, which meant a meeting of NATO foreign ministers had to be rescheduled.
Britain’s relations with Russia have been strained since the assassination in London of Alexander V. Litvinenko by radiation poisoning in 2006. Britain has sharply opposed the Russian annexation of Crimea and its proxy war in eastern Ukraine.
The British government has regularly called for the removal of the Syrian leader, Bashar al-Assad, whose government, backed by Russia, is accused of using sarin gas last week against civilians, an attack that killed scores and sickened hundreds.
The attack prompted President Trump to order an American missile strike on a Syrian air base, an action that Britain supported.
In his statement, Mr. Johnson said, “We deplore Russia’s continued defense of the Assad regime even after the chemical weapons attack on innocent civilians” and called on Moscow to do “everything possible to bring about a political settlement in Syria and work with the rest of the international community to ensure that the shocking events of the last week are never repeated.”
Mr. Johnson said he had discussed the matter with Mr. Tillerson, adding that the secretary of state would visit Moscow as planned after the G7 meeting to deliver a “clear and coordinated message to the Russians.”
The Russian Embassy in London, known lately for its droll efforts to answer any Western criticism of Moscow, posted an orchestral Twitter message (Tchaikovsky) that asked whether Mr. Johnson’s canceled visit was “theatrics” for lack of an argument.
