U.S. Navy Ends Search for 3 Sailors Missing Since Plane Crash Near Japan
HONG KONG — The United States Navy on Friday ended its search for three sailors who have been missing since a transport plane crashed near Japan this week, the Navy’s Seventh Fleet said in a statement.
Eight of the 11 passengers and crew members who were aboard the C2-A Greyhound propeller cargo plane were rescued after the crash Wednesday. The Seventh Fleet said they remained in good condition.
“Our thoughts and prayers are with our lost shipmates and their families,” Rear Adm. Marc Dalton said in the statement. “As difficult as this is, we are thankful for the rapid and effective response that led to the rescue of eight of our shipmates, and I appreciate the professionalism and dedication shown by all who participated in the search efforts.”
The crash was the fifth accident this year for the fleet, which has its headquarters in Japan and is the Navy’s largest fleet overseas. The accidents, including a pair of deadly collisions, led the Navy to relieve the head of the Seventh Fleet of his command in August.
The plane crashed in the Philippine Sea about 500 nautical miles southeast of Okinawa around 2:45 p.m. Wednesday while en route to the aircraft carrier Ronald Reagan, the Seventh Fleet said. The C2-A Greyhound is a model that has been in use for decades to ferry personnel and supplies to and from aircraft carriers at sea.
The plane was flying from Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni to the Ronald Reagan, which was conducting a training exercise with the Japanese navy.
The Navy said three United States guided-missile destroyers, two Japanese helicopter carriers and three Japanese destroyers were involved in the search, along with helicopter squadrons and maritime patrol aircraft. Ships and aircraft had covered nearly 1,000 nautical miles before the search was called off at 10 a.m. Friday, the Seventh Fleet said.
It said that the names of the missing had not been released, but that their families had been notified.
The fleet has faced a string of deadly accidents this year. Among them, the destroyer Fitzgerald collided in June with a Philippine container ship south of Tokyo. Seven of the Fitzgerald’s crew were killed and several were injured, including the ship’s commanding officer, Cmdr. Bryce Benson.
In August, 10 sailors were killed when the destroyer John S. McCain collided with an oil tanker near Singapore. The top two officers of the destroyer were relieved of duty in October.
The head of the Seventh Fleet, Vice Adm. Joseph P. Aucoin, was removed in August because of the accidents. A Navy investigation found that the deadly collisions had been the result of basic errors that were “avoidable.”
