All 6 U.S. Combat Deaths in Afghanistan in 2017 Were in Fight Against ISIS
KABUL, Afghanistan — All six of the American soldiers who have died in combat in Afghanistan this year were S involved in the fight against the Islamic State group in its stronghold in a small eastern area of the country.
Five of the six may have been killed by their own side, according to reports from American and Afghan military officials.
The casualty rate shows an increased concentration on fighting the local branch of the extremist group, known here as the Islamic State in Khorasan, which two years ago was dismissed as a small breakaway faction, numbering in the low hundreds, of the much more powerful Taliban.
Since March, the United States military has said that joint Afghan-American forces have killed or captured hundreds of Islamic State fighters.
Last year, one American soldier was killed in combat in Nangarhar Province, the eastern area that includes the Achin District — the Islamic State’s stronghold — in mountains close to the Pakistani border. In all, nine American soldiers were killed in 2016, four of them Special Operations forces in combat roles. The others were on bases or in support roles.
The deaths on Saturday of three American soldiers — a fourth was wounded and transported out of Afghanistan — were the result of a “green on blue” attack, or insider attack, by an Afghan commando, said Jawed Salim, a spokesman for the Afghan Army Special Forces command.
But Afghan officials were skeptical of a claim by the Taliban that the commando had infiltrated the unit intending to carry out the attack.
“It is part of their propaganda war,” said Gen. Mohammad Radmanish, a spokesman for the Ministry of Defense. “We need to investigate what really happened here.”
The attacker was killed by the Americans, who returned fire, Afghan officials said.
The United States military has not yet commented in any detail on Saturday’s attack, and the victims’ names have not been released pending notification of next of kin. The military rarely releases Special Operations details.
Although the United States military is ostensibly on an “advise and assist” mission to aid Afghan forces, the Obama and Trump administrations have granted wide latitude for Special Operations forces to participate in Afghan combat missions.
Afghan officials confirmed that the latest deaths took place in the midst of an operation against the Islamic State, despite the Taliban’s claim of responsibility.
Vice President Mike Pence, speaking at an event in Milwaukee on Saturday, said he and President Trump had been briefed on the deaths.
“When heroes fall, Americans grieve, and our thoughts and prayers are with the families of these American heroes,” Mr. Pence said.
The first American killed in Afghanistan this year, Staff Sgt. Mark R. De Alencar, 37, of Edgewood, Md., was also involved in an operation against the Islamic State in Nangarhar Province, according to a statement from the Defense Department.
A much-decorated veteran of the Army in Iraq, Sergeant De Alencar earned his Green Beret in 2016, according to Military Times.
He “died April 8 in Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan, of injuries sustained when his unit came in contact with enemy forces using small-arms fire during combat operations,” the Defense Department said.
Just over two weeks later, on April 26, two Army Rangers were killed in Achin District during a major operation against the Islamic State.
The Pentagon spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, said they might have been killed by friendly fire, presumably from close air support during the fight.
“We are investigating the circumstances of the combat deaths of the two Army Rangers in the beginning of what was an intense three-hour firefight,” Captain Davis said.
The military identified the men as Sgt. Joshua P. Rodgers, 22, of Bloomington, Ill., and Sgt. Cameron H. Thomas, 23, of Kettering, Ohio.
Ten days later, the American military commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., said the operation had also killed the “emir” of the local Islamic State in Khorasan, Sheikh Abdul Hasib.
“This successful joint operation is another important step in our relentless campaign to defeat ISIS-K in 2017,” General Nicholson said, using the military’s shorthand for the local Islamic State affiliate. “This is the second ISIS-K emir we have killed in nine months, along with dozens of their leaders and hundreds of their fighters.”
He said that Sheikh Hasib had been responsible for a deadly attack in March on a military hospital in Kabul, in which militants killed more than 50 people, many of them patients.
Between the two fatal episodes in April, the United States military dropped a GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, known as the mother of all bombs, the largest nonnuclear bomb ever deployed, on what it said was an Islamic State tunnel complex in Achin District.
It was unclear how much damage the 22,000-pound bomb caused, and Afghan officials offered no proof for their assertion that 96 militants had been killed and that buildings had been destroyed in a two-mile radius. Islamic State radio disputed the claims.
The three soldiers killed on Saturday were fighting about a mile from where the bomb had been dropped, Afghan officials said.
While the Islamic State appears to have ousted the Taliban from much of Achin District, there have been only scattered reports of Islamic State activity in other parts of the country, with the Taliban still the dominant insurgent force nationally.
American Special Operations troops are involved in joint operations with Afghan forces against the Taliban in southern Helmand Province and in northern Kunduz Province, but so far this year, no Americans have died in those areas.
Yet in two episodes in March, according to Afghan officials, a total of 11 American soldiers were wounded by Afghan soldiers in green-on-blue attacks in Helmand.
