BRUNEI IS GREETED AS THE 159TH U.N. MEMBER
Brunei Darussalam, a newly independent nation on the South China Sea, became the 159th member of the United Nations today.
Under a brilliant sky, security guards raised Brunei's yellow, black, white and red flag as Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar marked the occasion, saying that it brought the the United Nations ''closer to one of its fundamental aims, that of universality of membership.''
Brunei Darussalam, which means ''Brunei, Abode of Peace,'' is one of the smallest but most prosperous United Nations members. The 2,226-square- mile nation on the northwest coast of the island of Borneo has a population estimated to be 200,000. Annual per capita income is $10,340. The country is expected to produce nearly 64 million barrels of oil this year, earning $1.5 billion. Brunei has $13 billion in currency reserves, greater than those of Switzerland or Britain.
Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah Muizzaddin Waddaulah, the 38-year-old ruler of Brunei, told the General Assembly this morning: ''Our country has known peace, but also war; wealth, but also poverty; energetic commerce, but also isolation; development, but also exploitation; self-government, but also foreign rule. All this has not been without benefit to us. It has taught us to appreciate the realities of this world.'' Friendly Ties Recalled
Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah added that ''in the world of today the collective strength of the United Nations is the ultimate hope for us small countries.'' In his speech surveying global problems, the Sultan mentioned Vietnam for its ''continued occupation of Kampuchea'' and Israel for its ''occupation of Arab lands, including southern Lebanon,'' but he spoke only of ''the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan'' without mentioning the presence of Soviet troops.
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief American delegate, and the heads of all the regional groups went to the podium to welcome Brunei. Mrs. Kirkpatrick recalled ''a variety of ties, all of them friendly, extending back over the past 100 years and more,'' between the two countries.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick welcomed ''the representatives of Brunei Darussalam to New York City and to the United States.'' Brunei has opened an embassy in Washington, and an American Embassy has opened in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei's capital.
The Sultan marked the entry of his country by giving a check for $1 million to Dr. Richard Jolly of Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund.
Mr. Perez de Cuellar gave a reception this afternoon for Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah and his representative at the United Nations, Haji Omar bin Haji Serudin. More than 100 diplomats and Secretariat officials attended it in the south lounge outside the Security Council. Fruit juice and soda were served because Brunei is a Moslem country that forbids the consumption of alcohol.
Brunei, a British protectorate for 96 years, became independent on Jan. 1 this year. The country is an absolute monarchy with almost no opposition political activity, according to information provided by the New York City Commission for the United Nations and for the Consular Corps.
