RIO DE JANEIRO — President Michel Temer of Brazil on Saturday attacked the billionaire whose secret recording of a conversation between the two men has fueled a corruption scandal leading to widespread calls for Mr. Temer’s resignation.
In a brief but combative television address to the nation, Mr. Temer leveled explosive charges against the billionaire, Joesley Batista, accusing him of insider trading and the manipulation of audiotapes.
Mr. Temer contended that Mr. Batista, 44, an heir to the JBS global beef empire, profited immensely from currency and stock trades in the days before the recording was made public. The president insisted he would not quit despite facing an uproar over their taped discussion about obstructing graft inquiries.
“He committed the perfect crime,” Mr. Temer, 76, said of Mr. Batista, accusing him of lucrative trades in futures markets after negotiating a plea deal with investigators. The president also called Mr. Batista a “criminal,” claiming he had fled to New York.
Reports about Mr. Batista’s negotiations with investigators, and the resulting fears about renewed political turmoil, sent shock waves through Brazil’s financial markets in recent days, and the uncertainty gripping the country created a potential windfall for some investors.
The aggressive positioning by Mr. Temer, who called Mr. Batista a “notorious exaggerating windbag,” raised the stakes in the political impasse engulfing Brazil.
Calls for the president to resign have intensified since Brazil’s prosecutor general said Mr. Temer was facing an investigation into claims he received millions of dollars in illicit payments and sought to obstruct an anticorruption drive.
Mr. Temer argued on Saturday that efforts to restore economic stability in Brazil were at stake if his government fell. The president, a career centrist politician whose views have turned more conservative, rose to power just a year ago after a bitter power struggle resulting in the impeachment of his leftist predecessor, Dilma Rousseff.
Regarding the accusations of Mr. Batista’s trades, Brazil’s securities regulator said Friday night that it was investigating alleged irregularities by JBS, including the possible crime of insider trading.
The financial newspaper Valor Econômico previously reported that the Brazilian authorities were exploring whether JBS profited from trades related to the market turmoil around Mr. Batista’s plea deal. JBS said in a statement that its trading activities were legal.
Mr. Temer also claimed on Saturday that Mr. Batista’s recording of their meeting one evening in March at the president’s residence in the capital, Brasília, had been “manipulated and adulterated.” Mr. Temer said he was issuing a request to the Supreme Court to suspend the investigation into him.
JBS said that the recording was not adulterated, adding that Mr. Batista and other executives from the company had provided an array of documents to support their testimony in plea negotiations.
Analysts did not think the televised speech would do much to help the president’s position.
“This does not reduce the political crisis and does not improve Temer’s situation,” said Paulo Baía, a professor of political science at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, describing the president’s strategy as trying to disqualify his accuser and the evidence that Mr. Batista provided about Mr. Temer.
“Temer is in intensive care, in a very serious state, trying to survive,” Mr. Baía said.
Indeed, the investigation of Mr. Temer is the deepest crisis of his brief presidency. Allies of Mr. Temer have been forced to resign over claims that they tried to stymie corruption inquiries, but Mr. Temer has had some success in persuading lawmakers to approve austerity measures aimed at shoring up confidence in the economy.
Mr. Temer was already governing under the cloud of scandal, facing testimony that he negotiated a $40 million bribe for his scandal-ridden Brazilian Democratic Movement Party in 2010. Mr. Temer, who has struggled with dismal approval ratings, has denied the claims.
But while Brazil’s Constitution prevents sitting presidents from being investigated for acts committed outside their terms in office, Mr. Temer is coming under intense scrutiny over the latest claims. In Mr. Batista’s recording, Mr. Temer seems to be heard endorsing bribes of a jailed politician who helped orchestrate Ms. Rousseff’s ouster, as Mr. Batista brags about buying off a prosecutor and a judge.
According to testimony released by the Supreme Court, executives at JBS said that Mr. Temer received about $4.6 million in illegal campaign contributions in 2014, when he ran for vice president on Ms. Rousseff’s ticket, and pocketed some of the money for himself.
Mr. Temer insisted on Saturday that he was innocent of wrongdoing. He accused Mr. Batista, who traveled recently to the United States, of not spending a day in jail despite admitting to an array of crimes.
“He’s freely walking the streets of New York,” the president said.
Mr. Temer also accused JBS of a $1 billion trade before the latest scandal. He suggested that “people connected to the economic group” had leaked information about the recording because the revelations “would provoke chaos in the foreign exchange market,” allowing Mr. Batista to profit from the episode.
