Saudis Shift Account of Khashoggi Killing Again, as 5 Agents Face Death Penalty
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Saudi Arabia threatened five of its agents with the death penalty on Thursday for killing the dissident Jamal Khashoggi, as the kingdom changed its story, again, about how the crime was committed and continued to try to distance its de facto ruler, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, from any responsibility.
Announcing an update on the kingdom’s own investigation, the public prosecutor portrayed the killing of Mr. Khashoggi at the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul as an improvised decision taken at the last minute by a team that had been dispatched there with orders to retrieve him.
While the prosecutor’s report did not name any of the suspects, the leader of the team that confronted Mr. Khashoggi at the consulate was Maher Abdulaziz Mutreb, a frequent companion of Prince Mohammed, who often traveled with him abroad, according to a Saudi official familiar with the investigation.
Thursday’s explanation closely echoed a previous Saudi account — portraying the killing as a rendition gone wrong — that President Trump had derided as “one of the worst in the history of cover-ups.”
But the Saudis acknowledged for the first time on Thursday that the team sent to meet Mr. Khashoggi in Istanbul had not only ambushed and killed him in their consulate but had also dismembered his body — as Turkish officials have maintained for weeks.
Speaking to reporters in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, a spokesman for the public prosecutor said the order to kill Mr. Khashoggi had been taken by only a single intelligence agent on the scene in Istanbul, without authorization from superiors in Riyadh, and that it was accomplished with a deadly dose of a tranquilizer — not by strangulation, as the kingdom had previously said.
The mutilation of the body, the prosecutor said, was a spur-of-the-moment decision to get the body out of the consulate.
In addition to the five threatened with execution, by beheading, six others have been charged with crimes related to the killing. The prosecutor’s office said none of the accused could be identified while the investigation goes on.
The announcement on Thursday filled in none of the many remaining gaps in the accounting of the killing and offered almost nothing to shake the conclusions of United States intelligence agencies and many Western officials that Prince Mohammed had to have authorized the assassination.
These gaps, and the Saudis’ insistence that the killing was an improvisation, present a dilemma for the Trump administration, which has embraced the crown prince as the central figure in its plans for the region and has stood by him in the face of mounting outrage over Mr. Khashoggi’s killing.
Just hours after the Saudi announcement on Thursday, the Trump administration said it was slapping sanctions for human rights violations on 17 Saudis who were involved in the killing, including a top adviser and several security agents with close ties to the crown prince himself.
[Read more about the close ties some of those charged in the killing have with Crown Prince Mohammed.]
Many questions remained on Thursday. Saudi prosecutors said the team included a criminal evidence specialist to clean up the scene if necessary. However, publicly available information about that agent portrays him as a medical doctor specializing in autopsies, and the Turks have said he arrived in Istanbul with a bone saw.
Nor did the Saudi investigation disclose the name or contact information of a supposed local collaborator who prosecutors said disposed of Mr. Khashoggi’s remains in a still unknown location. The prosecutors said they interviewed the accused agents to produce a sketch of the collaborator, which they said they would share with the Turks.
Mr. Khashoggi, a Virginia resident and Washington Post columnist, disappeared inside the consulate on Oct. 2, and Saudi Arabia maintained afterward that he had left unharmed. When the kingdom later acknowledged that he had died inside, it first claimed he had been strangled by accident in a fight with its agents — an account that convinced almost no one.
The kingdom finally acknowledged three weeks ago that evidence provided by Turkey had indicated a planned assassination, and the Trump administration welcomed the admission as a sign of progress toward accountability. “The Saudis have acknowledged that this was a premeditated attack,” Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Fox News on Nov. 4.
Now, the kingdom is hedging on that acknowledgment of premeditation, with the prosecutor indicating the killing of Mr. Khashoggi was planned, at most, within a few hours before it took place.
Turkey has applied pressure on the kingdom to reveal who ordered the killing and has implied the plan must have been approved by Prince Mohammed. This week, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey expressed frustration that the prince was failing to follow through on his promise to expose the truth about the disappearance and death of Mr. Khashoggi.
On Thursday, Turkey quickly dismissed the Saudis’ new explanation, with the country’s foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, declaring it “unsatisfying.”
“The dismembering of the body is not an instant decision,” Mr. Cavusoglu said, according to news reports. “They brought the necessary people and tools to kill him and dismember the body in advance.”
The American sanctions targeted 17 people for their connections to the killing, including Saud al-Qahtani, a close aide to the crown prince; Mr. Mutreb, the intelligence agent who has often traveled abroad as part of the crown prince’s security detail; and Salah Tubaigy, the autopsy specialist who Turkish officials say dismembered Mr. Khashoggi after he was killed.
The public prosecutor said that Mr. Qahtani, a powerful aide to Prince Mohammed who has directed vast social media campaigns against the kingdom’s enemies, met with some of the agents before they flew to Turkey. The purpose, the prosecutor added, was to give them “some useful information” related to “his belief that the victim had been co-opted by organizations and countries hostile to the kingdom and that his presence abroad constituted a danger to the security of the homeland.”
Thursday’s sanctions were the harshest responses yet by the United States to Mr. Khashoggi’s killing, but the death has also energized Congress. A bipartisan group of senators on Thursday introduced legislation that would block weapons sales to Saudi Arabia and impose further sanctions on individuals involved in the killing and aspects of the Saudi-led war in Yemen.
The United States did not sanction the most senior Saudi official implicated in its internal investigation, the deputy head of Saudi intelligence, Brig. Gen. Ahmed Asiri. Prosecutors said that in the days before the killing he had ordered an operation to return Mr. Khashoggi to the kingdom, by convincing him or “by force.”
A team of 15 operatives was assembled, with five of them charged with confronting Mr. Khashoggi, the prosecutor’s announcement said. Heading the group was Mr. Mutreb, who knew Mr. Khashoggi from their time working together at the Saudi Embassy in London.
Mr. Khashoggi came to the consulate to get the paperwork he needed to marry his Turkish fiancée. An argument broke out with the Saudi agents, the prosecutors said, so Mr. Mutreb gave the order to kill Mr. Khashoggi.
The agents bound Mr. Khashoggi and gave him a large dose of a tranquilizer, which killed him, the prosecutors said. The team then dismembered him and gave his remains to a local collaborator to dispose of before filing a false report to Riyadh stating that Mr. Khashoggi had left the consulate safely.
It was this false report, the prosecutor said, that accounted for the denials and changes in the Saudi story in the weeks following Mr. Khashoggi’s killing.
Turkish officials have laid out a parallel narrative of how Mr. Khashoggi died, based on what they say is an audio recording of the killing captured inside the consulate. Turkish officials familiar with the recording have said Dr. Tubaigy moved quickly and methodically to dismember Mr. Khashoggi’s body with a bone saw, further suggesting premeditation.
The audio recording, shared by the Turks with the C.I.A. director, Gina Haspel, during her visit last month to Ankara, also appears to cast doubt on the Saudi assertion that Mr. Khashoggi’s killing had not been planned in advance and was not expected by top officials back in the kingdom.
According to three people familiar with the recordings, Mr. Mutreb can be heard instructing a superior in Arabic over the phone to “tell your boss” that the mission was accomplished.
United States intelligence officials believe the “boss” referred to by Mr. Mutreb is almost certainly Prince Mohammed, the people familiar with the recording said.
But those people said that Prince Mohammed’s name is not heard, so the belief that he was the “boss” was a matter of deduction. It is also possible that Mr. Mutreb may have incorrectly believed that Prince Mohammed ordered the killing.
Saudi officials disputed that account of the audio recording, saying Turkey had provided a transcript of a recording and allowed Saudi intelligence services to listen to it. The officials said that the recordings heard by Saudi intelligence agents did not contain the phrase “tell your boss.”
It is possible that the Turks may have shared their evidence selectively with other intelligence services, including the Saudis and Americans.
Saudi officials remain insistent that Prince Mohammed did not know about the killing in advance.
“Absolutely, his royal highness the crown prince has nothing to do with this issue,” the Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir, said at a news conference in Riyadh on Thursday.
“Sometimes mistakes happen,” he added. “Sometimes people exceed their authority.”
Thursday’s statement from the Saudi prosecutor put the blame for the killing squarely on Mr. Mutreb and four other agents the Saudis say were in the room with him when Mr. Khashoggi was killed.
In a statement carried by the state news service, the public prosecutor said he would seek the death penalty for those five men and that criminal charges had been filed against them and six others, while the investigation continued.
If the death sentences of agents who had worked so closely with the crown prince are carried out, it would surely shock a kingdom where powerful princes often protect those they trust.
The Saudi courts could take years to render a verdict and might ultimately reduce the sentences. As an absolute monarchy, Saudi prosecutors and judges all report to the king and his royal court, headed by Prince Mohammed.
Scholars of Saudi Arabia said the capital punishment of five government agents could carry a high cost for Prince Mohammed. “It would send a really bad message to his close allies and the people he has trained to carry out these operations: They are not safe if things go wrong and they are the ones to be blamed,” said Madawi al-Rasheed, a professor at the London School of Economics.
“But if he does not kill them, how does he protect himself from the international outrage?” Professor Rasheed added. “It is a double bind.”
