Giving Thanks, ‘Ausmerican’ Style
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email. Here’s where to find all our Oceania coverage.
______
Thanksgiving is an American holiday that comes with both flaws (it oversimplifies colonization) and traditions that are widely beloved (turkey and thankfulness).
This week’s newsletter aims to bring a small piece of the holiday to Australia.
More specifically, every year (in my house at least) we go around the dinner table and ask people to share at least one thing they’re thankful for. So this year I’m doing the same with all of you and our bureau of diverse global Australians.
I’ll start. Here are some of the especially Australian things I’m thankful for this year:
• Sydney sounds. My days start with kookaburras and lorikeets, followed by one particular motorcycle, then the sounds of children. There’s a rhythm to it that I’ve grown to really love.
• Small towns. From Pyramid Hill to Elliston, Lismore, Larrimah and Wee Waa, regional towns have been overwhelmingly warm and welcoming to New York Times journalists this year. Thank you to all who shared their time and stories.
• Our Australia team. They love this country enough to question its ways; they work hard; they know the world and they know how to laugh on tight deadlines.
Now here’s what they’re thankful for:
→ Jamie Tarabay
• That in spite of the many changes Sydney has undergone, the essence of everything that is my hometown remains the same: the scent of the eucalyptus trees, the cacophony of countless birds greeting the morning, and the Babel of languages when I stop in to get my favorite Lebanese sweets during a shop in the western suburbs.
• That after spending nearly 20 years abroad dreaming of everything I missed about Australia, Gaytime is still around and is still the best ice cream ever.
→ Besha Rodell
• I’m thankful for hot jam donuts, affordable healthcare, salad sandwiches, public transit that works, and median-drinking season in Melbourne.
→ Isabella Kwai
• The beginning of the Australian summer. The way the days stretch into infinity and excitement fills the air and people’s faces just relax. The air smells sweeter somehow.
• Preholiday sales. Seriously, everything is on sale right now. Well, don’t just look at me! Go forth and find bargains!
→ Tacey Rychter
• The misguided, automated emails from my gym that praise me for the workouts I’m not doing. Thank you for the hustle, computer bot!
• “Why Did You Do That?”, the one, true, slow-burning banger from “A Star Is Born.” I thought it was the worst, but now I would make it my morning alarm if I knew how. You make your ass music, Ally! Don’t let Bradley Cooper tell you what to do!
→ Vicky Xiuzhong Xu
• I’m thankful for: fresh air, Google and good coffee. I will miss these things when I go back home to China.
• And the jacaranda trees, they’re so beautiful!
→ Livia Albeck-Ripka
• That for now, Australia’s strict gun laws have prevented massacres and terrorist attacks from unfolding as they do in America — leaving Australians at least some time for anxiety about where onions should be placed inside sandwiches.
• Speaking of onions, the food — and especially the produce — in Australia: a juicy mango on a muggy summer afternoon; a just-shucked oyster drizzled in lemon; sweet deep purple figs and tomatoes that taste like tomatoes! And sourdough — delicious, hot, crusty sourdough with melted butter.
... If you want to get in on the grateful action, share your appreciations in our Facebook group or by emailing us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
Also, our chief White House Correspondent, Peter Baker, is en route to Australia and we’ll be starting our local Thanksgiving on Thursday with a chat. If you’re a subscriber in Australia, join our group discussion on the partisan war awaiting President Trump.
More details can be found below.
Now for the news of the week, leaning a little more global and techie than usual.
______
A Times investigation that took months and many reporters revealed how the social network responded as it faced a series of scandals involving election meddling, consumer privacy and hate speech.
The gist: Faced with criticism of its public impact, the company went on the attack, lobbying in Washington and hatching schemes to shift the focus to other tech companies.
Here are six takeaways from the investigation.
______
What else is shaping our deceptive information ecosystem?
The Opinion section’s video team offers up a savvy, digital-first film series looking at Russia, and how one of the Soviets’ central tactics — the promulgation of lies — continues today, all over the world.
If you’re looking for the seeds of today’s fake news problem, the film argues, look to Moscow.
Episode 1 (15 minutes) reveals how one of the biggest fake news stories ever concocted — the 1984 AIDS-is-a-biological-weapon hoax — went viral in the pre-internet era. Meet the K.G.B. operatives who invented it and the “truth squad” that quashed it. For a bit.
Episode 2 (14 minutes) provides a chilling look at how the seven rules of Soviet disinformation are being used to create today’s fake news stories.
Episode 3 (17 minutes) argues that there is a way out of this: Eastern European countries living in Russia’s shadow can teach us how to start fighting back, but only if our politicians decide to stop profiting from these tactics and fight them instead.
______
The bravest, boldest surfers alive are about to converge on the small town of Nazaré in Portugal for some of the most monstrous and unpredictable waves on the planet.
“Tall as a 10-story building, the waves are caused by a submarine canyon — three miles deep, and 125 miles long — that abruptly ends just before the town’s shoreline,” our correspondent writes in this colorful dispatch.
It’s a lesson in how a fishing village can be transformed by the desire for danger, changing its views about “lazy surfers” along the way.
______
Now here’s how to start a New York Times Styles story: “After years of romances with a series of fabulously wealthy Nigerian boyfriends, the flamboyant Canadian sisters Jyoti and Kiran Matharoo needed somewhere to store the pricey spoils of their dating careers.”
It goes on like that for a while. Until “their unapologetic pursuit of material excess backfired, exploding into a messy international scandal involving one of the world’s richest men, a salacious gossip website, stints in Nigerian and Italian custody, and a battle to clear their names with Interpol.”
Read it start to finish for all the gilded details.
______
Yes, we covered the Bunnings sausage and onion scandal. How could we not?
A few other highlights:
• Julia Baird writes about getting gas from Hugh Jackman, and the importance of Australians maintaining their Australian accents — while also noting that Americans and the British love to mock how Australians talk even though they can’t imitate it.
• Papua New Guinea Is Rich in Resources but Poor in Health: Officials in Papua New Guinea hoped that hosting the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting would elevate the country’s profile, but a national health crisis — which we reported from all over the country — threatens to overshadow it. One cause of the crisis: a shift in Australian aid.
• Opinion: Down Under, More Humane Private Prisons: Australia and New Zealand contract with companies to design and manage facilities and reward the companies financially if their prisoners’ recidivism rates fall.
• Australia’s Prime Minister ‘Surprised’ by State’s Secret Deal With China: The state of Victoria signed on with China’s Belt and Road Initiative at a time when intelligence officials are concerned about Beijing’s influence.
• Rocket Lab’s Modest Launch Is Giant Leap for Small Rocket Business: The company’s Electron rocket carried a batch of small commercial satellites from a launchpad in New Zealand, a harbinger of a major transformation in the space business.
______
Did you catch that mention of Peter Baker above?
Our chief White House correspondent, he has written about President Trump since the start of his administration, and previously covered Presidents Obama, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush.
On Thursday at 9 a.m. in Sydney, Peter will share his insights and answer questions on a special conference call for New York Times subscribers. I’ll be your host. Join us if you can, and if you’re not a subscriber yet, here’s how to fix that.
One more special event for you: Matthew Anderson, our International Culture Editor (Adelaide-born and London-based) will be at the National Gallery of Victoria on Sunday Dec. 2, discussing M.C. Escher with Benno Tempel, director of the Gemeentemuseum Den Haag, home to the world’s largest public collection of Escher’s work. Enjoy your weekend!
