2 Israel Centrists, Benny Gantz and Yair Lapid, Join Forces Against Netanyahu
CAIRO — Israel’s two leading centrist candidates for prime minister, Benny Gantz and Yair Lapid, joined forces on Thursday to try to defeat Benjamin Netanyahu, the right-wing leader who has led the country for a decade, in a move that instantly makes the April 9 elections far more competitive.
Mr. Gantz, a retired military chief of staff who entered politics only weeks ago, and Mr. Lapid, a former finance minister who founded the Yesh Atid (There Is a Future) party in 2012, agreed to take turns as prime minister if elected, with Mr. Gantz holding that job and Mr. Lapid serving as foreign minister for the first two and a half years before switching roles.
“A winning team needs to be led,” Mr. Lapid said at a rollout of their combined slate of candidates in Tel Aviv. “I wouldn’t be standing here today if I didn’t believe that Benny Gantz could lead us to victory and then lead the country. He’ll be an excellent prime minister. I believe in him.”
Saying that “Israel has lost its way” under Mr. Netanyahu’s “government of divide and conquer,” Mr. Gantz promised a restoration of national unity. “From this moment forward, we work together, as a team, to lead Israel toward repair,” he told the crowd, who chanted “history,” as if it were being made.
Campaigning separately, the two had espoused many of the same goals, addressing social problems like overcrowded hospitals, traffic-choked roads and a housing crunch, while promising a cautious approach to peacemaking with the Palestinians. Their shared critique of Mr. Netanyahu — that he had been corrupted by his long tenure and had sown discord in the Israeli populace to keep his hold on power — also made for a natural fit.
Their combined slate of candidates, to be called the Blue and White Party, after the colors of the Israeli flag, will have a heavy military cast at the top: Mr. Gantz, who led the armed forces from 2011 to 2015, had already recruited another former chief of staff, Moshe Ya’alon, who is also a former defense minister, to run with him. And Gabi Ashkenazi, a popular former general who preceded Mr. Gantz as chief of staff, signed up once Mr. Gantz and Mr. Lapid struck their bargain.
Those reinforcements are likely to impede Mr. Netanyahu’s line of attack. After polls showed a Gantz-Lapid merger posing a credible threat to Mr. Netanyahu, he responded with a visceral online campaign aimed at depicting the former general as a liberal. “Gantz: Weak left,” Mr. Netanyahu’s videos warned. “Netanyahu: Strong right.”
Mr. Netanyahu, whose governing coalition was already the most right-wing in Israel’s history, doubled down on that strategy this week, enticing one of his coalition partners, the Jewish Home party, to merge with an extremist party, Jewish Power, which includes followers of Meir Kahane, the anti-Arab rabbi who was assassinated in New York in 1990. Mr. Kahane’s party, Kach, which supported expelling Arabs from Israel and banning intermarriage, won a seat in Parliament in 1984 but was later banned from Israeli politics.
Though his Likud party remains a force in the polls, Mr. Netanyahu may be at his most vulnerable point: He is awaiting the attorney general’s decision on whether to indict him on corruption charges.
Mr. Netanyahu, who addressed reporters shortly after the Gantz-Lapid announcement, warned that his challengers would link up with Arab voters to stop him from getting elected and would go on to allow the creation of a Palestinian state, endangering Israel’s existence.
“Tonight the choice is clear,” he said. “A weak left government led by Lapid and Gantz with an Arab party bloc, or a strong right government with me at its lead.”
For Mr. Lapid, a former television personality whose party came in second place in its first legislative election, in 2013, the power-sharing agreement is a distinct comedown. He had built a strong party organization across the country and had vowed to run only in the top spot in any merger.
But Mr. Gantz’s military record provides security-minded Israeli voters reassurances that Mr. Lapid cannot. And with Mr. Gantz’s party, Israel Resilience, gaining support largely at Yesh Atid’s expense, Mr. Lapid was apparently left with no choice but to relent and join forces if he wanted a shot at defeating Mr. Netanyahu.
The combined party’s roster of candidates has no women in the first six slots. And members of Yesh Atid suffered along with Mr. Lapid in the merger: Orna Barbivai, the first female general in the Israeli military, wound up 10th on the Blue and White list, down from third on Yesh Atid’s.
There is precedent for power-sharing arrangements: Shimon Peres and Yitzhak Shamir took turns as prime minister from 1984 to 1988, and Isaac Herzog and Tzipi Livni worked out a similar arrangement when they joined forces as the Zionist Union in their unsuccessful campaign against Mr. Netanyahu in 2015.
