Airstrikes on Syrian Military Sites Renew Focus on Chemical Weapons
JERUSALEM — Overnight strikes Thursday on Syrian military sites — which are said to produce chemical weapons and advanced missiles — brought renewed attention to Syria’s chemical weapons, and appear to have been an escalation of Israel’s efforts to prevent its enemies from gaining access to sophisticated weapons.
The Syrian military said Israeli warplanes had struck the sites early Thursday, killing two people near the town of Masyaf in western Syria and causing unspecified material damage.
Israeli officials did not comment on the strike, but a Syrian monitoring group and two former Israeli officials said it had targeted an installation of a government agency that produced chemical weapons and a military base that produced advanced missiles.
The strike came a day after a United Nations commission accused the Syrian government of using chemical weapons in an attack in April that killed dozens in the town of Khan Sheikhoun and flooded clinics with victims gasping for breath.
While many foreign governments and news organizations had previously concluded that Syrian forces were probably behind the attack, the unequivocal condemnation from the United Nations was the most authoritative statement blaming the Syrian government for it.
Syria and its ally Russia have claimed that the Syrian government did not use banned munitions and that the attack was carried out by rebels on the ground.
The Syrian government once had large stockpiles of chemical weapons, which it agreed to give up under a 2013 agreement between Russia and the United States. That deal was brokered after Syrian forces were accused of carrying out chemical attacks near Damascus that killed more than 1,000 people.
The agreement was hailed as a diplomatic success by the Obama administration, an achievement now tarred by continued reports of further chemical attacks, indicating that the Syrian government may have hidden some of its chemical stocks or is still producing them.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which monitors the conflict from Britain through contacts inside Syria, said that the attack on Thursday had hit a branch of the Scientific Studies and Research Center, a government agency that the United States and others have accused of producing chemical weapons.
It also hit a military base nearby where ground
