Putin Rejects Cutting Off Oil to North Korea
SEOUL, South Korea — President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said his country opposed cutting off oil supplies to North Korea as part of new sanctions being considered in the wake of the country’s latest nuclear test, according to official accounts of his meeting Wednesday with President Moon Jae-in of South Korea.
The United States and its allies are pushing for a global embargo on oil exports to North Korea as the United Nations Security Council debates a new round of sanctions against the North. Russia has veto power over any such Security Council sanctions.
North Korea has been getting most of its oil from China. But it has been trying to increase imports from Russia as an alternative source of energy for its military, as well as for its decrepit industries, amid signs that Beijing is growing impatient with the North’s nuclear adventurism, South Korean analysts said.
During a meeting on the sidelines of an economic summit conference in the eastern Russian city of Vladivostok on Wednesday, Mr. Moon asked Mr. Putin to support the proposed oil embargo. But Mr. Putin said that sanctions and pressure would not persuade North Korea to give up nuclear weapons, said Yoon Young-chan, a spokesman for Mr. Moon.
Stopping oil exports to the country would instead hurt ordinary North Koreans by disrupting hospitals and other civilian facilities, Mr. Yoon quoted Mr. Putin as saying. Mr. Putin said Russia exported less than 40,000 tons of oil a year to North Korea.
“Without political and diplomatic tools, it is impossible to make headway in the current situation; to be more precise, it is impossible,” Mr. Putin said during a joint news conference with Mr. Moon.
Despite his opposition to cutting off oil exports, Mr. Putin said North Korea’s nuclear and missile tests were a flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions.
But “we should not act out of emotions and push North Korea into a dead end,” Mr. Putin said, according to dispatches from South Korean reporters. “We must act with calm and avoid steps that could raise tensions.”
His remarks came on the same day that the South Korean Defense Ministry said that the United States military planned to complete the deployment of an advanced missile-defense system in South Korea on Thursday.
The deployment of that system, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system, or Thaad, is vehemently opposed by China, which argues that it will exacerbate tensions with North Korea and could undermine China’s own nuclear deterrent by giving the United States another means to monitor its missiles.
In April, the United States installed the radar and two of the six interceptor-missile launchers of the Thaad battery on an abandoned hilltop golf course in Seongju, 135 miles southeast of Seoul, the capital. The battery became operational immediately.
On Wednesday, the Defense Ministry said the remaining four launchers would be installed on Thursday in response to “North Korea’s advancing nuclear and missile threats.”
Those threats have prompted both Beijing and Moscow to agree on increasingly tougher sanctions against North Korea, most recently backing a Security Council ban of the country’s coal, iron, iron ore, lead and seafood exports. But the two countries opposed any measures that could destabilize North Korea, a stance Mr. Putin reaffirmed to Mr. Moon on Wednesday.
They said that sanctions had so far done little to stop North Korea from increasing its nuclear and missile capabilities, and that the country remained determined to build a nuclear arsenal despite President Trump’s threatening to rain down “fire and fury” on it if it continued threatening the United States.
Mr. Moon himself has been a proponent of dialogue with North Korea. But as North Korea has escalated tensions recently with a series of missile tests, he has pushed for tougher new sanctions, hoping that they would force the North to return to the negotiating table.
In his meeting with Mr. Moon, Mr. Putin called on the United States and South Korea to consider the “freeze-for-freeze” proposal from China and Russia in which Washington and Seoul would suspend their joint annual military exercises in exchange for a North Korean moratorium on missile and nuclear tests.
Washington and Seoul have rejected the idea out of hand, calling it tantamount to giving up legitimate defense exercises as a reward for halting the North’s weapons program, which is already banned by the United Nations.
“If North Korea does not stop provocations, the situation could become uncontrollable,” Mr. Moon said at the start of his meeting with Mr. Putin.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan, a close United States ally against North Korea, is also attending the Vladivostok forum and is scheduled to meet with Mr. Putin on Thursday.
“We must make North Korea understand there is no bright future for the country if it pursues the current path,” Mr. Abe told reporters before his departure from Japan.
North Korea has remained defiant, hinting at more weapons tests. “We will respond to the United States’ gangsterlike racket for sanctions and pressure in our own way,” a spokesman for North Korea’s Foreign Ministry told its official Korean Central News Agency on Tuesday. “The United States will have to bear full responsibility for the catastrophic consequences.”
The Security Council has imposed eight rounds of increasingly harsh sanctions against North Korea since the country conducted its first nuclear test in 2006. North Korea has usually responded to the Council’s sanctions resolutions with more weapons tests.
