American Arrested at Protest in Vietnam Is to Be Deported
HONG KONG — An American graduate student who was arrested during a protest in Vietnam last month will be released and deported, a court announced on Friday, soon after the man went on trial for disrupting public order.
The student, Will Nguyen, had joined demonstrations against proposed special economic zones that protesters feared would result in Chinese control of Vietnamese territory.
Mr. Nguyen, a Yale graduate from Houston, had faced a possible prison term of up to seven years.
A court in Ho Chi Minh City ruled that because Mr. Nguyen was a foreigner and had expressed regret for his actions, he should be immediately deported, according to Vietnamese state media reports.
“Will is free!” Victoria Nguyen, Mr. Nguyen’s sister, said in a Twitter post. She had organized a campaign calling for his release.
Mr. Nguyen, whose family fled South Vietnam in the 1970s, was visiting Ho Chi Minh City on a stopover before graduation from a master’s program at the University of Singapore. He posted photos of the protests on social media and expressed pride in the peaceful demonstrations.
“I can’t stress how enormous of an achievement this is” for the Vietnamese people, he wrote on Twitter.
The authorities said Mr. Nguyen had asked the police to move vehicles blocking the demonstrators’ path, and that when they refused, he climbed onto a vehicle and urged the crowd on.
Demonstrations were also reported in Hanoi, the capital; in the coastal city of Nha Trang; and in the southeastern province of Binh Thuan, where more than 100 people were arrested after protesters set fire to public buildings.
The special economic zones opposed by the protesters would offer leases of up to 99 years to foreign investors. Many of the demonstrators feared that Chinese investors would dominate the zones, touching on a longstanding fear of Chinese encroachment in Vietnam. Protesters also said they were upset about a draft cybersecurity law.
Human rights groups say demonstrators reported being assaulted by police officers sent in to quell the protests.
Video showed Mr. Nguyen, 32, with blood covering his face as he was dragged by a group of men, who are believed to have been plainclothes police.
He was later shown on Vietnamese state television saying that he regretted breaking the law and would not join such activities again. The confession was likely coerced, human rights experts say.
“We are pleased that William Nguyen will be reunited and returning home with his family,” Francisco Bencosme, Asia Pacific advocacy manager for Amnesty International USA, said in a statement. “However we don’t believe he should have been detained in the first place for freely expressing himself.
“This farce trial underscores Vietnam’s abhorrent human rights record where people are frequently detained, arrested and in some cases tortured,” Mr. Bencosme said.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo raised Mr. Nguyen’s arrest with Vietnamese leaders while visiting the country earlier this month and “encouraged a speedy resolution to his case,” said the State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert.
A bipartisan group of 19 senators and members of Congress sent a letter to Mr. Pompeo on Wednesday urging him to “use all diplomatic means at your disposal to ensure Mr. Nguyen’s safe return to the United States.”
Some of Mr. Nguyen’s family traveled to Ho Chi Minh City for the trial, and his mother was able to visit him in detention on July 17, Victoria Nguyen said.
“He was very happy to see her, and my mom said she was relieved that he is mentally and physically stable,” she wrote in an email before the trial.
