Putin Says Trump’s Critics in U.S. Are Trying to Undermine Meeting
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia warned on Thursday that certain political forces in the United States — a formulation that usually refers to a supposed anti-Russian cabal in the American national security establishment — were trying to undermine what he called a successful meeting this week with President Trump.
“We see that there are forces in the United States that can easily sacrifice Russian-U.S. relations for the sake of their own ambitions,” Mr. Putin said in a foreign policy speech to Russian ambassadors. “Let’s see how the events develop, especially considering that certain forces are trying to disavow the results of the meeting in Helsinki.”
The comments came after Mr. Trump, who was criticized by representatives from both parties for suggesting that he had accepted Russian denials of interference in the 2016 election, contrary to the conclusions of American intelligence agencies, sought to clarify his comments at a cabinet meeting in Washington. Mr. Trump said that, in fact, he did accept the agencies’ conclusions.
Russia, while developing its foreign policy toward the United States, should consider the efforts of a “quite powerful” group in Washington that seeks to undermine good relations between the countries, Mr. Putin said on Thursday.
The comments were some of the most extensive to date by Mr. Putin about the Russian view about whether a “deep state” of national security elites dominates American politics and is conspiring to thwart Mr. Trump.
Mr. Trump, too, seemed to feel that the talks in Finland were fruitful and underappreciated. “The Summit with Russia was a great success, except with the real enemy of the people, the Fake News Media,” he said on Twitter. “I look forward to our second meeting so that we can start implementing some of the many things discussed, including stopping terrorism, security for Israel, nuclear.”
This was not the first time Mr. Trump has described journalists as the “enemy of the people,” a phrase with a long and complicated history in the former Soviet Union.
Nikita Khrushchev, a war-hardened Communist not known for squeamishness, demanded an end to the use of the term in 1956 because it was, he said, “specifically introduced for the purpose of physically annihilating” those who disagreed with Stalin.
Other Russian officials have for months spoken of plots in America against Mr. Trump, echoing the American leader’s own criticisms of the special counsel investigation into Russian election interference and possible collusion with members of Mr. Trump’s campaign team as the work of the “deep state.”
“We see that there are forces in the United States that put their own group and narrow partisan interests above the national ones,” Mr. Putin said. “Our renowned satirists once wrote very well about such people: ‘Pathetic, paltry people.’ But this is not so in this particular case: These people are not pathetic and not paltry. On the contrary, they are quite powerful and strong if they can, excuse my crudeness, force-feed millions of their people various stories that are hard to digest in normal logic.”
In speaking of “pathetic, paltry people” in reference to opponents of Mr. Trump’s Russia policies, Mr. Putin appeared to be quoting from the book “The Twelve Chairs” by the Russian satirists Ilya Ilf and Yevgeny Petrov, using a derisive phrase that is familiar to readers of Russian literature.
Mr. Putin has also responded to criticism stemming from the news conference after the summit meeting, issuing a clarification of his own comments.
He suggested on Monday that Moscow might allow American law enforcement agents to question 12 Russian men identified by the special prosecutor, Robert S. Mueller III, as military intelligence officers who hacked the Democratic National Committee and other targets during the 2016 election, if the United States allowed Russia to question American intelligence agents and others suspected of illegal activity in Russia.
Mr. Trump called it “an incredible offer.”
Back in Washington, the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said on Wednesday that the idea was under consideration, though a State Department spokeswoman, Heather Nauert, called the idea “absolutely absurd.” On Thursday, Ms. Sanders said Mr. Trump disagreed with the proposal.
As an example of how such an arrangement could be helpful, Mr. Putin had said Russian law enforcement agents wanted to question associates of a onetime investor in Russia, William F. Browder, who he said had violated Russian tax laws and donated $400 million of the gains to the Democratic Party. Mr. Browder denied violating Russian tax laws.
No such donations were made, campaign finance records show. The figure, in fact, would amount to roughly half of Hillary Clinton’s campaign budget in 2016. On Wednesday, the Russian prosecutor general’s office issued a clarification, saying Mr. Putin had meant to say $400,000.
“Our president asked us to correct the sum,” said a spokesman, Aleksandr Kurennoy.
In another Russian effort to clarify the record from Helsinki, the transcript of Mr. Putin’s comments posted on the Kremlin website omitted the second portion of a two-part question that had been posed to Mr. Putin.
A reporter had asked: “Did you want President Trump to win the election? Did you direct any of your officials to help him do that?”
Mr. Putin quickly answered, “Yes, I wanted him to win, because he spoke about normalizing Russian-American relations,” a video of the news conference shows.
It was unclear whether Mr. Putin had heard the full translation before answering. The Kremlin transcript seemed to support this interpretation — rather than a surprise admission of election meddling, which Russia has denied — by including only the first portion of the question.
Mr. Putin’s answer is also edited. The transcripts cites him saying only, “Because he spoke of normalizing Russian-American relations.”
