   I am a mother, community organizer, and part of a collective of queer and trans people leading the fight to decriminalize the sex trades in New York. For us, this is a bodily autonomy issue — our bodies, our choice — but more than that, it’s an economic issue. And it’s personal. 
   I became homeless as a young person after I ran away from sexual violence in the foster system. When I was 15, like thousands of youth experiencing homelessness in New York City, I started trading sex in exchange for housing. I didn’t see sex as the problem; I saw lack of safe housing as the problem. Sex was my survival strategy. 
   Because I was under 18, anti-trafficking advocates and laws define my experience as “child sex trafficking.” This is not how I define my experience; I am a survivor of violence and homelessness who traded sex to meet my needs. 
   Data shows that I am not alone. There are only 4,000 shelter beds across the U.S. for at least half a million unaccompanied homeless youth. More than 50% were asked to leave by a caregiver; others ran away because of abuse, family rejection or both. This reality leads to many youth trading sex to access basic needs like housing — with LGBTQ+ youth in New York trading sex at seven to eight times the rate of their peers. 
   After turning 18, I continued to trade sex when I was short on rent or needed to pay a bill. 
   New York criminalizes adults for trading sex for resources, but falls short in addressing root causes. Instead, we subject sex workers, and the people who live and work with them, to state violence. Criminal records make it harder for people in the sex trades to access resources such as housing, services and other employment. 
   Criminalization also makes workers more vulnerable to police violence. In late 2017, massage parlor worker Yang Song died in Flushing, falling four stories during a police raid. Her family says she was raped by an undercover officer before her death. 
   Decriminalization shifts the focus from policing adult sex work to ending violence and exploitation. New Zealand and Australia’s New South Wales, the only places in the world with decriminalization have seen decreases in trafficking and increases in sex workers’ labor and legal rights since changing their laws. Sex workers are more able to vet clients for safety and report violence because their work is no longer underground. We distinguish this model from legalization models like we’ve seen in Nevada and Amsterdam, where those who are most marginalized, such as people who don’t have documentation or are experiencing homelessness, are excluded by strict legal requirements that empower owners and managers over workers themselves. 
   In New York, we want to divest from policing that causes harm to people trading sex and invest in resources to keep them safe. That is why Decrim NY is working with state Sens. Jessica Ramos and Julia Salazar, and Assemblymembers Richard Gottfried and Yuh-Line Niou, to introduce the most comprehensive plan in our nation’s history to decriminalize and decarcerate adults trading sex. 
   The bill, which we’re releasing today, repeals statutes that prohibit the sale and purchase of sex between adults. Unlike proponents of “The Nordic Model,” which continues to criminalize clients as a means to ending the sex trades, we know that taking away our clients would mean taking away our survival. Trans and gender non-conforming New Yorkers still experience significant employment discrimination, leading to nearly 40% of black trans people to trade sex to survive. 
   We also want to rewrite “promoting prostitution” statutes that penalize sex workers for working together or sharing a space for safety. And we would let sex workers erase their criminal records so that we can we can move on with our lives. 
   We do not change any laws against human trafficking, rape, assault or sexual harassment. Many of us are survivors, and it’s because we know that decriminalization will prevent violence that we fight so fiercely for it. 
   Neither young people nor adults should have to trade sex to meet their needs. 
   But until safe housing and a living wage are accessible to everyone, many of us will continue to sell sex to survive. In the meantime, we must decriminalize sex work so that it’s safer for the people doing it. 
   Raven is a Decrim NY organizer and former survival sex worker.   
