SÃO PAULO, Brazil — Call it the ultimate mike drop.
Just days before his four-year term ends, Brazil’s attorney general, Rodrigo Janot, filed criminal charges accusing two former presidents of running the state like a criminal enterprise. With these charges, taken together with the corruption charges he has pursued against the current president, Michel Temer, Mr. Janot appears keen to leave his post having condemned the entire political establishment that has run the country over the past 15 years.
On Tuesday, in a surprise move, Mr. Janot, Brazil’s top prosecutor, accused former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva; his handpicked successor, Dilma Rousseff; and six other Workers’ Party stalwarts of running a huge kickback scheme during their nearly 14 years in power.
Ms. Rousseff, who was impeached and ousted in August 2016 for breaking budgetary laws, has maintained that she was a fundamentally honest public servant who fell victim to a legislative “coup” by conniving rivals, including Mr. Temer. Mr. Janot is challenging that narrative, asserting that his office has enough evidence to demonstrate that she was more than a bystander in a multibillion pay-to-play scheme that drained the government’s treasury while enriching scores of businessmen and politicians.
In June, Mr. Janot took a swing at Mr. Temer, accusing him of condoning payment of a bribe to keep an imprisoned politician from cooperating with prosecutors.
“For Janot and his team, who see themselves as soldiers in a long fight to build the rule of law in Brazil, this is like unloading one last cannon barrage on their way off the battlefield,” said Brian Winter, vice president for policy at the Americas Society/Council of the Americas.
Mr. Temer has so far avoided standing trial thanks to his considerable base of support in the lower house of Congress, which must refer criminal cases against serving elected officials to the Supreme Court. In the case of Mr. da Silva and Ms. Rousseff, who no longer enjoy that protection, the Supreme Court must now decide whether to accept the charges and proceed with a trial.
Mr. Janot is leaving his successor with a daunting set of politically explosive cases just as the campaign to elect a new president next year gets underway. Yet the departing attorney general, who was appointed by Ms. Rousseff in 2013, was reported to be feeling more anxious than cocky as he planned his final moves.
“I’m not at all courageous. What I am is afraid, and fear makes us alert,” he told colleagues during a recent meeting, according to the newspaper Folha de S. Paulo. “Afraid of what? Of making big mistakes and of disappointing the institutions.”
Regardless of how the cases unfold, Mr. Janot and other prominent legal officials have set in motion a debate about the structural problems that have made cronyism and corruption routine in Brazil. In recent months, a Supreme Court justice, Luís Roberto Barroso, also a Rousseff appointee, has been advocating sweeping political reforms. These include measures to make political campaigns cheaper and elected officials more responsive to their constituents than to their parties.
“We have a political system that is very lousy,” Justice Barroso told reporters during a recent meeting in Rio de Janeiro. Yet, he said, “the changes the country needs depend on the approval of the people who would be affected, and people typically don’t legislate against their interests.”
Politicians have shown more interest in delegitimizing the judicial branch than in debating political reforms. On Wednesday, Mr. da Silva and Ms. Rousseff lashed out at the attorney general.
“The decision by the attorney general is another attack on Brazilian democracy,” Mr. da Silva’s lawyers said in a statement. “The country is facing a real threat to basic rule of law and democracy.”
Ms. Rousseff called the allegations against her “fabrications” cobbled together from the accounts of cooperating witnesses.
The judiciary’s conduct has not been without controversy.
This week, an audio recording of a conversation between two businessmen whose testimony led to the charges against Mr. Temer called into question their reliability as witnesses. One of the businessmen, Joesley Batista, is an owner of the meat processing giant JBS and has admitted paying millions in bribes to politicians — including Mr. Temer — in exchange for favors for his company. As part of his plea deal, Mr. Batista agreed to hefty fines but avoided jail time.
The new recording, which appears to have been made accidentally, suggests that Mr. Batista had improper contact with a former prosecutor from the attorney general’s office. Mr. Janot says the plea deals could be rescinded, but he has argued that the evidence the men provided remains solid.
The growing acrimony between the political old guard and the judiciary stands to benefit politicians who can portray themselves as outsiders untainted by corruption allegations. That could lead to unpredictable situations.
While Mr. da Silva, a towering leftist leader, still has a strong support base, his recent conviction in a separate corruption case means that he may be in prison by the time a new president is sworn in.
Two men appear eager to take advantage of voters’ disdain for the political establishment. João Doria, mayor of São Paulo and a showy businessman, and the ultranationalist lawmaker Jair Bolsonaro, a former army officer who has defended torture, are early front-runners in a field that seems unusually open.
“Bolsonaro is campaigning as the rule-of-law candidate,” Mr. Winter said. “Many Brazilians believe he is the only clean politician out there, and they are so desperate to have someone who is not a crook they are willing to hold their noses.”
Prosecutors who have played leading roles in exposing the misdeeds of the political class bemoan what they say is a shortage of clean, inspirational figures waiting in the wings.
“Today, good people are disincentivized from entering politics because politics is seen as a business for the corrupt,” Deltan Dallagnol, a federal prosecutor who has played a leading role in the corruption cases, said in a recent interview. “What we need is exactly the opposite.”
