In Bahrain, Gaza Is Pitched as a ‘Hot I.P.O.’ Many Palestinians Aren’t Buying It.
MANAMA, Bahrain — Judged on its own terms, the White House-led conference on improving the lives of Palestinians, staged this week in Bahrain as the first step toward a long-promised American peace plan, was a smashing success.
It proved that the Israel-Palestinian conflict “actually is a solvable problem, economically,” Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, declared proudly — though that proposition was never actually in doubt.
It put the conflict back near the top of the international agenda, at least for a day and a half. And it may have also created a powerful new constituency for a resolution, by bringing together billionaire fund managers and the heads of banks and multinational corporations like AT&T, who seemed to be grappling with the subject for the first time.
Investors expressed such excitement about someday pouring money into projects on the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said, “it’s going to be like a hot I.P.O.”
But if the goal of the two-day conference was to persuade Palestinians to give the Trump administration’s approach to solving the conflict the benefit of the doubt, there were few signs of that.
For all the self-congratulation by Mr. Kushner, Mr. Mnuchin and their guests, the Palestinian Authority government, which deeply mistrusts the Trump administration, boycotted the event. Most Palestinian business leaders shunned it. Hamas, the militant organization that controls Gaza, was not even invited.
The centerpiece of the conference was a $50 billion economic investment plan for the Palestinian territories to, as Mr. Kushner put it, show Palestinians “what the future can look like” under a Trump administration peace plan.
Palestinian officials have dismissed the idea of promising economic incentives before presenting a political plan as a cynical effort to buy off their national aspirations.
But the economic plan itself was conspicuous in its omission of any mention of Israel’s military occupation of the West Bank and its blockade of the Gaza Strip.
Palestinians say that the occupation, with its restrictions on the movement of people and goods, unpredictable delays, confiscations of property and natural resources and nearly insurmountable obstacles to development, is the single biggest impediment to the growth of their economy.
Yet the conference seemed to buy into a longstanding Israeli counterargument: that the corruption of Palestinian leaders, rather than the occupation, is most responsible for holding their people back.
“They’ve blamed Israel and everyone else for all the people’s problems,” Mr. Kushner said of Palestinian politicians, “when in fact the common theme coming up is that this is all achievable if the government wants to make these reforms.”
Indeed, speaker after speaker in Manama — including ministers from several Arab countries of the Persian Gulf — made a point to argue that the Palestinians’ natural entrepreneurship, strong literacy and educational attainment levels could all be unleashed but for the poor “governance” and the absence of “transparency” and of the “rule of law” that they said afflict the West Bank and Gaza.
“They are missing the point,” said Sam Bahour, a Palestinian-American business consultant who was watching the proceedings online from Ramallah, in the West Bank. “The point is not talking about pie-in-the-sky projects. These projects, if you take the word ‘Palestinian’ out of them, any developing country can do well. Some of them have been talked about for 25 years now. Why haven’t they materialized? What’s stopping them? The Israeli military occupation. It’s the elephant they left out of the circus when they went to Bahrain.”
He also said that Mr. Kushner’s attacks on the Palestinian Authority amounted to a “smear campaign” that was sadly backfiring by rallying Palestinians around their leaders, however much they would prefer to elect new ones.
He dismissed the conference as a waste of time.
Even the solitary Palestinian speaker on the conference agenda, Ashraf Jabari, a Hebron businessman, defended the Palestinian Authority and — perhaps alone among the speakers — spoke of the occupation and the Gaza blockade as shackling Palestinian businesses.
He spoke obliquely of “difficulties we encounter in our work” because of the Gaza blockade and the “unstable situation” on the West Bank.
But the moment was head-turning: Mr. Jabari, considered a political outcast for forging ties with Jewish settler leaders, has been attacked by Palestinian politicians as a turncoat.
Much of the conference seemed only loosely connected to the region, or to anything at all. Financial titans familiar from the pages of Forbes swapped war stories as if they were stuck waiting for their private jets to be refueled. Buzzwords like “virtuous cycle” peppered the conversations. “We call it ‘spectrum,’” someone explained at one point.
It took Tony Blair, the former British prime minister and a veteran of Middle East peacemaking attempts, to raise another seemingly taboo subject that Mr. Kushner and his team have sought to set aside.
“I remain a believer in the two-state solution, in the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a state,” Mr. Blair said, in a head-to-head talk with Mr. Kushner.
But Mr. Blair also seemed to endorse, if not the idea of putting the economic plan first, at least the importance of having one.
“Politics is necessary for the economy to flourish,” Mr. Blair said, adding: “It’s foolish to think you can have the economics without sound politics. But it’s absolutely foolish to think you can have the politics without the economics buttressing it.”
Mr. Kushner, speaking to reporters at the conference’s end, was again cagey about the timing of the long-awaited political part of the plan. “We’re going to put out our political plan at the right time and we’ll see what happens,” he said, echoing one of his father-in-law’s pet phrases.
He insisted that there would be no penalizing the Palestinians for shunning the conference, and said they were welcome to reach out to him. “We’ve left the door open,” he said.
But others warned that right-wing Israelis were already seizing on the Palestinian boycott of the event as fresh evidence of “rejectionism,” which some want to use to justify annexation of occupied territory in the West Bank.
Nimrod Novik, a former Israeli official, said that one advantage of the yet-to-materialize peace plan was at least that expectations were low that it would succeed.
Peace initiatives that raise hopes and fall short, he said, are too often interpreted as evidence that peace simply cannot be achieved.
“I think we are lucky,” Mr. Novik said. “This time the failed outcome will surprise very few, if anyone. Maybe only Kushner will not be able to explain to himself what was wrong with his perfect plan.”
