European Union Chastises Poland, and Draws a Sharp Rebuke
WARSAW — The long-simmering acrimony between the European Union and Poland’s right-wing government intensified sharply on Wednesday when the bloc’s lawmakers voted to begin a process that could result in a loss of voting rights within the European Union for Poland, drawing a furious reaction from Warsaw.
The European Parliament voted, 438 to 152, to adopt a resolution to begin the first stage in a lengthy process to invoke Article 7 in the European Union’s founding treaty, the section that allows the bloc to punish member nations who violate its democratic and human rights standards.
Article 7 has never been invoked.
After a debate, which Poland’s foreign minister said reminded him of “hate speech,” the Foreign Ministry issued a defiant statement saying the resolution adopted “should be regarded as an instrument for exerting political pressure on Poland.”
The European Parliament’s move came less than a week after an estimated 60,000 nationalist Poles marched in Warsaw, including members of some extreme right-wing and neo-fascist groups.
Wednesday’s vote had been in the works long before the march on Saturday, but the European lawmakers took pains to include a specific criticism of that event in their resolution. And several members of the European Parliament, including Frans Timmermans, senior vice president of the European Commission, the bloc’s executive body, criticized the march harshly, further underlining the widening chasm between Warsaw and Brussels.
Relations between the union and the Polish government have soured steadily since the nationalist Law and Justice Party assumed power two years ago. The immediate cause of the vote on Wednesday was concern in Brussels that the Polish government was moving to limit judicial independence and threaten the rule of law, a serious breach of European Union values.
All the vote did was officially request that the Article 7 process begin. The next step is for the European Union’s civil liberties committee to conduct an investigation.
Such a move was also taken against Hungary’s nationalist government in May over its moves to restrict asylum-seekers and regulate nongovernment organizations. That investigation continues.
During the debate on Wednesday, a member of Poland’s chief opposition party criticized the country right-wing government for allowing “racism, xenophobia and neo-fascism on Poland’s streets,” a reference to some of the placards carried during Saturday’s march.
This drew a chilly rebuke from Prime Minister Beata Szydlo, who warned Poles about speaking against their country abroad.
“Politicians who defame their country in an international forum do not deserve to represent it,” Ms. Szydlo said.
