U.N. Asks International Court to Weigh In on Britain-Mauritius Dispute
UNITED NATIONS — Britain suffered a diplomatic blow on Thursday as the United Nations General Assembly voted to refer London’s territorial claim to one of its last colonial outposts to an international tribunal for its opinion on the dispute.
Notably, in the wake of Britain’s decision to exit the European Union, many countries of the bloc did not side with Britain. The United States did.
At issue is whether Britain has a claim to a strategically important Indian Ocean archipelago, known as the Chagos Islands. One of the islands, Diego Garcia, is the site of a British-American military base.
Mauritius, a former British colony that gained independence in 1968, says the islands are part of its territory and wants the International Court of Justice to offer its opinion. It casts the British claim as part of an unfinished struggle to free Mauritius from colonial rule.
Britain says its claim to the Chagos Islands is enshrined in an agreement it made with Mauritians in 1965, and it contends that such a bilateral dispute has no business being adjudicated by the tribunal, which operates in The Hague.
On Thursday, Britain lost the first battle. In a vote in the General Assembly, 94 countries voted to ask the International Court of Justice to render an opinion on which country has sovereignty over the Chagos Islands. Fifteen countries sided with Britain and voted against the resolution, and 65 countries abstained, effectively sending the case to the court.
The court will be asked to weigh in with an advisory opinion that is not enforceable.
Britain holds a permanent seat on the powerful Security Council, and British diplomats contend that even though the country intends to withdraw from the European Union, it is not withdrawing from Europe or its role in the world.
In part, the British defeat in the General Assembly refects, as Richard Gowan, a British expert on the United Nations at the European Council on Foreign Relations, put it, an opportunity for countries to “bash their old colonial masters.” Indeed, the vast majority of former British colonies sided with Mauritius.
“Yet the vote also reflects Brexit Britain’s perilous diplomatic position,” Mr. Gowan said. “The fact that most E.U. members abstained rather than backing the U.K. highlights its isolation.”
Most European countries, including France, Germany and the Netherlands, abstained. So did China.
Britain, once the most powerful European colonial power, held territory stretching from Cape Town to Calcutta to the Caribbean. Its colonies began to win independence, sometimes through armed rebellion, after the two world wars, leaving London with only a handful of territories.
Among them is the Chagos Archipelago in the Indian Ocean, roughly between the Maldives and Mauritius.
Matthew Rycroft, the British ambassador to the United Nations, made the case to the General Assembly that Britain had told Mauritius that it would “cede” its claim to the Chagos Islands when they were no longer required for military purposes.
In what seemed to be a warning about possible challenges to other former colonial powers that maintain a small number of territories around the world, Mr. Rycroft said the General Assembly should not interfere in a dispute between countries, and should let Britain and Mauritius resolve the dispute themselves. “Just think: How many other bilateral disputes left over from history could be brought before the General Assembly this way?” he said. “The present draft resolution could set a precedent that many of you in this hall could come to regret.”
Britain had emptied the Chagos Islands of its inhabitants, and while it would not consent to letting them return, Mr. Rycroft said Britain had offered aid to help them in the countries where they now live, including Britain.
The United States was firmly in the British corner. In early June, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki R. Haley, sent a letter to diplomatic missions in New York, urging them to vote against the resolution. The letter warned of setting a “precedent for future bilateral disputes.” Ms. Haley went on to note that the United States had jointly operated a base on the Diego Garcia with Britain and that it did not wish to negotiate with Mauritius on such a matter.
Speaking on behalf of Mauritius, Anerood Jugnauth, a former prime minister, accused Britain of illegally retaining control of the Chagos Islands when it agreed to the independence of Mauritius, calling it “an unlawful excision.”
As for the military base, Mr. Jugnauth, currently the defense minister, took pains to say that Mauritius had no problem with it operating on Diego Garcia. “Mauritius is also very much concerned about security in the world and that is why we have repeatedly said that we do not have any problem with the military base, but that our decolonization process should be completed,” he said. “We want to assure the United Kingdom and the United States of America that the exercise of effective control by Mauritius over the Chagos Archipelago would not, in any way, pose any threat to the military base.”
It is unknown how long the International Court of Justice will take to render its opinion on the matter, or how it will rule. But in the General Assembly, Britain found itself facing head winds over the Chagos Islands.
“That Britain was able to obtain the support of barely a dozen countries — including just four E.U. members and no permanent member of the Security Council apart from the U.S. — will, hopefully, give it pause for thought, about its position on Chagos,” said Philippe Sands, a British lawyer who has represented Mauritius in its dispute with Britain.
