This week’s Australia Letter is written by Isabella Kwai, a reporter with the bureau. Sign up to get it by email. 
______
If there’s one thing that will stay with me as a reporter, it’s that old, if obvious, Walt Whitman refrain that I’ll paraphrase: People are large, and they contain multitudes. (The other thing is that I need to drink more water.) 
So rarely are people what they first appear to be. That’s why I have a soft spot for profiles — an attempt to capture the nuance of the origin stories that determine who we are and why we’re on our chosen path.
From writers to tech founders, The Times has profiled more than a few Australians who are making the world an interesting place to be. This week, we rounded up our favorite stories on seven Australians to watch.
And we want your help: Who are the quiet Australians doing interesting things that you think the world should know about? Is there someone you know — like this Tasmanian oyster farmer who is writing a children’s book a day for his daughter — who may be invisible to the mainstream but who is staunchly marching to the beat of their own drum? Write to me at nytaustralia@nytimes.com. 
“There does have to be a revolution of form in order to accommodate different voices. Because stand-up in the form it exists — stand-up punch line — that’s a form that was set up by men for men.”
Hannah Gadsby, the stand-up comedian from Tasmania, was not expecting her show “Nanette,” in which she declared she was quitting comedy, to become a global sensation. But after it hit Netflix, it did, setting off existential arguments about the definition of comedy. Now, she’s in the midst of a second show, “Douglas.”
Read about her here.
“I think you can probably see that I’m sane, but I say and believe things that insane people believe. I don’t believe in a personal God, but I believe in the survival of the soul.”
There’s a strong case that Gerald Murnane is the greatest living English-language writer most people haven’t heard of. But rather than rubbing shoulders with the literati, he is tending bar in Goroke, a small town five hours from Melbourne.
Read about him here.
“In my head I thought, I’m going to build a portfolio and make it into a beautiful book and then send that to galleries because that’s how things work in the art world, isn’t it?”
You won’t find her collection in a gallery. But for Cj Hendry, an artist who has built a large following on Instagram for her hyper-realist drawings, it’s the photo-sharing platform that helps her sell out self-hosted solo exhibitions. You’ll want to become a follower.
Read the story here.
“It isn’t a wealth creation book which will make you a millionaire. It’s about security.”
In a country of 25 million people, Scott Pape has sold more than one million copies of “The Barefoot Investor: The Only Money Guide You’ll Ever Need” since its publication in 2016. But his message — that money is a means to live the way you want — has universal appeal.
Read more about him here.
“I had two choices: to die, or face the trauma and heartache I was running from. I had to choose to live, no matter how scattered, broken and bruised I was.”
She has been a practicing artist for decades, and her work is featured in major cultural institutions, but there is a sense that Karla Dickens’ rightful recognition has only just arrived. When her work lit up the sails of the Sydney Opera House in 2016, it was a mind-blowing moment, she said.
Read more about her here.
“People are interested now in what we’re saying. We have a voice. We have a sense of responsibility.”
Scott Farquhar and Mike Cannon-Brookes, the founders of the software company Atlassian, are Australia’s first start-up-to-I.P.O. tech billionaires. In the last year, they have started to enter the realm of political activism. 
Read more about them here.
Now onto other stories from the week.
______
— This Land Is a Sanctuary for Aboriginal Women. Bulldozers May Soon Come: Indigenous Australians have camped for over a year to block a proposed highway upgrade. The protest has become a homecoming that has allowed many to reconnect with their heritage.
— How One Billionaire Could Keep Three Countries Hooked on Coal for Decades: The story of the Adani mining project in Australia helps to explain why the world keeps burning coal despite the profound risk it poses to the future.
— New Zealand Officials Admit Letting Christchurch Suspect Send Hateful Letter: The lapse was particularly embarrassing because Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern and other leaders had said they would do everything they could to deny the suspect any further platform.
— Recycling Is in Crisis. Could These Innovations Be the Answer? Now that China is turning away the world’s recyclable waste, Australia wants to ban export of the materials and increase domestic processing. Here are some techniques being pursued.
— To Save Tiny Penguins, This Suburb Was Wiped Off the Map: An Australian state restored a habitat for the world’s smallest penguins by removing every home from a coastal development.
— Opinion: The Incontinent Cows of Middle-earth: New Zealand is less clean and green than its tourism marketing makes it out to be. The main culprit: the dairy industry.
_____
— What Worries Iceland? A World Without Ice. It Is Preparing: As rising temperatures drastically reshape Iceland’s landscape, businesses and the government are spending millions for survival and profit.
— Presenting The 1619 Project: To observe the 400th anniversary of the beginning of American slavery, The Times is launching a major initiative to tell the truth of what happened.
— The Day Jeffrey Epstein Told Me He Had Dirt on Powerful People: Columnist James B. Stewart went to Mr. Epstein’s Manhattan mansion to talk about Tesla. He ended up discussing much more — including his belief that sex with teenage girls should be acceptable. 
— China Is Waging a Disinformation War Against Hong Kong Protesters: In recent days, China has unleashed a barrage of manipulated news meant to undermine the demonstrators and stir up nationalist sentiment.
_____
The Weekly, a New York Times television series that brings our journalism to the screen for the first time, is now available in Australia! In each episode, follow Times journalists as they investigate the most pressing issues of the day, from twist to jaw-dropping twist.
 You can stream it here on SBS Demand. 
