What Survivors of ISIS Carnage Say About al-Baghdadi’s Death
BAGHDAD — In the Islamic State strongholds in Syria and Iraq where Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and his allies lived, there was bitterness at the news that the head of the Islamic State had died — not that it had happened, but that it had not happened sooner.
Mr. al-Baghdadi, who was killed in a nighttime raid by American Special Operations Forces in Syria early on Sunday, brought a trail of carnage into their lives through the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, destroying their homes and their cities and ultimately forcing hundreds of thousands of people to flee. 
The chaos unleashed by the Islamic State’s rise and the battles to destroy it is far from over, and the fighting, displacement and destruction are likely to disrupt people’s lives for years to come, so it is perhaps not surprising that Mr. al-Baghdadi’s death gave the survivors little solace.
“I lost my brother because of the ISIS organization and the despicable Baghdadi,” said Mohammad Salif al-Jaddi, an employee at the electricity department in the Iraqi city of Mosul. “I hope to see the Islamic State organization totally obliterated.”
The raid was no doubt a serious blow to the Islamic State, which has been decimated by five years of fighting Iraqi and Syrian Kurdish troops working closely with the United States, though its reach has already spread beyond the region. 
At the same time, there was little sense, among experts or among those who dealt with the daily specter of the Islamic State, that the death of Mr. al-Baghdadi after he was tracked down and killed at a house near Idlib, would bring an end to the group’s efforts to spread terrorism and fear. 
Since the Islamic State lost the last of its territory in northeastern Syria, its cells have continued to carry out guerrilla attacks in the area. Though it is not yet clear how the group will respond after Mr. al-Baghdadi was tracked down and killed at a house near Idlib, experts said they expected the group to continue on with new leadership, a sentiment shared by those who experienced life under the Islamic State.
“I don’t think that Daesh ends by killing this person who destroyed our revolution, killed my brother and displaced us,” said Yasmin Mashaan, a refugee in Germany from Deir al-Zour, an Islamic State stronghold on the Euphrates, using another name for the group.
“I am happy when every tyrant receives such a fate, whether it is Baghdadi who killed my brother, or Bashar al-Assad, who killed my other four brothers,” she said, referring to the Syrian leader.
