   More than 25,000 people around the world have signed no fewer than four online petitions trying to get Disney officials to allow a Spider-Man etching to adorn a 4-year-old’s tombstone. 
   The father of Ollie Jones, who died last year of a rare genetic condition, wanted to remember him with an etching of Spiderman on the little boy’s gravestone. 
   But so far it is not to be. The Walt Disney Co. has denied dad Lloyd Jones’s request to adorn the grave with a Spiderman tombstone tribute. 
   As of Wednesday evening four online petitions had collected more than 25,000 signatures overall entreating Disney to reconsider. 
   “I really wasn’t expecting this – it’s another massive blow,” Jones, of Maidstone, Kent, England, said in an e-mailed statement. “I felt sure they would allow it.” 
   The etching would cover the tombstone, according to The New Zealand Herald, and it features Spider-Man crouched across the top, his hand splayed out appearing to fling his signature spider silk into a message. 
   “Ollie Jones: The most precious gift we could ask for,” the message reads. “Your beaming smile will stay in our hearts and minds forever. Love you and miss you every day. Our special hero.” 
   Already devastated by the loss of his son to the rare genetic disease leukodystrophy, Jones is hoping the company comes through. 
   “We extend our sincere condolences,” Disney’s permissions department said in a statement to the family. “If we played a small part in Ollie’s happiness we are honored.” 
   Apparently that honor does not extend into the afterlife. 
   “Generations of fans have responded to our characters with the same wonder and delight that Ollie did,” Disney continued. “In fact, many believe the characters to be real. We have striven to preserve the same innocence and magic around our characters that brought Ollie such joy. For that reason, we follow a policy that began with Walt Disney himself that does not permit the use of characters on headstones, cemetery or other memorial markers or funeral urns.” 
   In other words, a movie franchise in which dozens of people die apparently does not want to be associated with death. 
   “Ollie’s last holiday was at Disneyland,” the boy’s flummoxed father told The New Zealand Herald. “He loved Spider-Man, and we had bought him all the toys.”   
