The message of the amicus brief filed with the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in late June was simple: Officers tasked with enforcing the Trump administration’s restrictive new asylum policy believe it violates federal law and fundamental American principles.
“We wanted the court to hear our story,” said Michael Knowles, the president of Local 1924 of the American Federation of Government Employees, the union that filed the brief on behalf of asylum officers in the Washington, D.C., area. “This is folks doing the work, saying, ‘This is wrong.’”
The impact of that message may reach far beyond the court.
It is part of a little-noticed shift, in recent weeks, in the public response to the Trump administration’s border crackdown. Institutions and groups that are not normally partisan or political have begun to state publicly that the administration’s policies violate their core values, and to back up those statements with action.
A few days before Mr. Knowles’s union filed its brief, for instance, employees at the Boston headquarters of Wayfair, an online furniture retailer, walked off the job in protest of their company’s decision to sell furniture to a detention center for migrant children.
It is too early to say whether more institutions will follow their lead. But, experts say, the history of successful mass movements around the world suggests that if they do, that could have a profound effect on public opinion and policy.
“My guts told me that sports activism would be a powerful tool,” said Richard Lapchick, an organizer of the American anti-apartheid boycott of South African sports teams, including the Davis Cup team, in the late 1970s.
“If you put what apartheid was on the sports pages, on the sports news, then there would be more people reading it or watching it,” he said.
Having seen firsthand the effect that such boycotts had on apartheid opposition in Europe, Mr. Lapchick resolved to do the same in the United States. By 1978, opposition to South Africa being allowed to play in the Davis Cup was so substantial that thousands protested outside the stadium.
“There were significantly more people outside than there were inside watching the match,” he recalled.
Historians believe that the boycotts of South African athletes and sports teams — including by the Olympics, by international soccer, rugby, and cricket leagues and by the Davis Cup tennis competition — played an important role in bringing an end to apartheid.
“Arguably not since Jesse Owens ascended the Berlin Olympic podium four times against a backcloth of Nazi triumphalism has an intervention through sport had such broad political repercussions,” Rob Nixon, a Princeton University professor, wrote in a 1992 article.
Doug Booth, a professor at the University of Otago in New Zealand who has studied the boycotts, has a more measured view, but does believe that they may have affected global opinion, cementing the view among the general public that supporting apartheid was socially unacceptable.
Respected institutions can cause sudden, sharp changes in what societies perceive as right and wrong, said Betsy Levy Paluck, a Princeton University professor who studies social norms and public morality. Her research, for instance, showed that after the United States Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage, Americans became much more likely to believe that the country as a whole supported the decision. International sports’ leagues anti-apartheid boycott would have sent a similar message.
Wayfair and the asylum officers’ union lack that kind of reach. But hearing from “a variety of groups that speak for a broad spectrum of Americans,” Dr. Paluck said, could have a similar effect. Groups like the American Civil Liberties Union speak to one community, online businesses like Wayfair to another, and the government employees’ union to yet another.
And if that coalition grows broader or more diverse, its normative power would grow, too.
The sports boycotts also imposed direct consequences on groups of people who might otherwise have been left unscathed by apartheid. “In a 1977 survey, white South Africans ranked the lack of international sport as one of the three most damaging consequences of apartheid,” Dr. Nixon wrote in the 1992 article.
The walkout by Wayfair employees, though tiny in comparison with the global anti-apartheid boycott, offers a glimpse of how protests might bring similar consequences to Americans who would not otherwise be directly harmed by the border policies.
The direct costs to Wayfair, in this case, were limited. The company promised, under pressure, to donate $100,000 — which it estimated to be more than the profit it made from the sale to the detention facility — to the Red Cross. But it refused to pledge to change its business practices, the employees’ main demand.
But the walkout also raised the specter of broader action, such as consumer boycotts or employee walkouts at other companies that do business with agencies involved in border enforcement. That expands the population now worrying about the border policies’ effect on their well-being — and if such actions occur, that group could widen even further.
“Irrespective of diverging religious opinions we shall fight for the right of our Jewish brothers and sisters to keep the freedom we ourselves value more highly than life,” Lutheran pastors throughout Denmark read aloud from a pastoral letter on Oct. 3, 1943.
The letter, which was signed by every Danish bishop and read aloud in Sunday services, was issued in response to the Nazi occupiers’ orders to round up and deport Danish Jews. Those orders, the bishops were saying in no uncertain terms, were not to be followed. Danes must protect their Jewish neighbors.
The public heeded that message, which was echoed by trade unions and other respected institutions. A rescue effort, organized by the Danish resistance and supported and funded by many ordinary citizens, managed to hide and then safely transport nearly all Danish Jews to safety in nearby Sweden.
“Local institutions, those that have a real impact on your daily life, they seem to have more of an impact on attitudes,” Dr. Paluck said.
That helps to explain why the Wayfair walkout, in which the employees gathered to protest in Boston’s Copley Square, has drawn more attention than some previous institutional activism.
Last year, for instance, more than 100 Microsoft employees posted an open letter to the company asking that it refrain from working with Immigration and Customs Enforcement, one of the agencies involved in the separation and detention of migrant families at the border. But that letter was not followed by any action.
Wayfair employees also began their action with an open letter. But they followed it with a public walkout in a busy city, communicating that this was a strongly held view within the community of Wayfair employees — and, it turned out, Boston more broadly.
“Workers in Copley Square looked out the window and went down to join,” Dr. Paluck said. “They’re getting other people, at least in the downtown Boston area, to think about this,” she added.
The power of public statements can be undermined if they are perceived as coming only from leaders, rather than a community as a whole, Dr. Paluck said.
Although a number of American religious leaders, including the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops and a number of prominent evangelical leaders, have condemned the family separations and the conditions in which children are being detained, their statements have been framed as critiques from leaders, rather than the unified condemnation of their religious communities. That has weakened their normative effect.
By contrast, the brief that the asylum officers’ union filed explicitly positions itself as speaking for its members — who, until recently, were the only officers piloting the restrictive new asylum policy.
“The consensus of a group that you wouldn’t necessarily think of as entering into this debate — that’s a very powerful signal of norms,” Dr. Paluck said.
Mr. Knowles, the union president, said that the ability to speak for the officers collectively was a role his organization took very seriously. “The brief does not mention us by name, it says the union on behalf of its officers,” he said.
The brief was an expression of collective alarm that the administration’s policies have left the American asylum system, and the vulnerable refugees it is supposed to shield, in extreme jeopardy, he said.
Asked what prompted them to act now, he paused.
“Why wait until the damage is irreparable?” he wondered. “Why wait to pull the fire alarm?”
