   It's not exactly watergate. 
   President Trump had his very own Rubio moment on Wednesday as he awkwardly paused to drink from a bottle of water in the middle of a speech recapping his 12-day trip to Asia. 
   "They don't have water, that's OK," Trump said as he ducked behind the podium and wagged a finger in the air. 
   A moment later he reached to his side after reporters pointed out bottles of Fiji Water on a table next to the lectern. 
   The President popped the cap and used two hands to take a swig as the sound of cameras clicking filled the room. 
   Trump then continued to tout his travels. 
   "Everywhere we went, our foreign hosts greeted the American delegation, myself included, with incredible warmth, hospitality and most importantly, respect," Trump said. 
   The President's dry tongue wasn't the only cringe-worthy spot in the speech. 
   He also referred to Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte as "Duarte." 
   Jose Napoleon Duarte was the president of El Salvador for five years in the mid-1980s. 
   The watershed moment of the speech was reminiscent of a similarly embarrassing sip that Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) took during his 2013 rebuttal to the 2013 State of the Union. 
   "Next time Marco Rubio should drink his water from a glass as opposed to a bottle—would have much less negative impact," Trump tweeted at the time. 
   Trump also attacked Rubio during the GOP primary campaign last year. 
   "Help, help me I need water," Trump told a crowd at a rally before splashing a bottle of water on stage and shouting, "It's Rubio!" 
   Trump also sent Rubio's campaign a case of Trump brand water with a note. 
   "Since you're always sweating, we thought you could use some water. Enjoy!" the note read. 
   Rubio responded on Wednesday by trolling Trump for his graceless guzzling. 
   "Similar,but needs work on his form.Has to be done in one single motion & eyes should never leave the camera. But not bad for his 1st time," he tweeted. 
   It's unclear if the President prefers Fiji over his own Trump-branded H2O, but a fan of the Los Angeles-based company updated its Wikipedia to include Trump's unexpected endorsement. 
   "Fiji Water is a brand of bottled water derived, bottled, and shipped from Fiji," it reads. "Fiji water is the official double handed thirst quencher of Donald Trump."   
