HEAR IT  Student pilot lands plane after instructor passes out during his FIRST lesson
   A beginner student pilot taking his first Cessna lesson landed the plane on a wing and a prayer Saturday after his instructor passed out cold in the cockpit. 
   Max Sylvester had never landed a plane in his life when he was forced to take control of the two-seater craft and guide it safely to the ground in Australia with the help of only an air traffic controller. 
   “Do you know how to operate the airplane?” the controller asked in terrifying audio obtained by Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 
   “This is my first, um, lesson,” Sylvester, 29, replied. 
   “Your instructor at the moment, are they unconscious?” the controller asked. 
   “He’s leaning over my shoulder. I’m trying to keep him up, but he keeps falling down,” Sylvester replied. 
   In a calm voice, the controller instructed Sylvester to keep the wings level and maintain a consistent speed and altitude. He asked again how the instructor was faring. 
   “He hasn’t woken up,” Sylvester replied. “I’ve just tried to lift his head back up to check, to see how he’s going, but he’s not responding.” 
   Sylvester was a little more than an hour into his lesson when the instructor lost consciousness. 
   A married father of three, Sylvester had taken two other lessons before, but this was his first in a Cessna, according to ABC. 
   He called the high-altitude emergency a “fight or flight” scenario, saying adrenaline and all his study prep kicked in when disaster struck. 
   “What kept me alive was my study. That definitely saved me,” he reportedly said. “If I hadn’t have studied, we wouldn’t be here — it is as simple as that.” 
   Once on the ground, the New Zealand-born instructor Robert Mollard was taken to a hospital. Sylvester later visited him there but declined to comment on his condition. 
   Sylvester said the dramatic incident wouldn’t be the end of his flying career. 
   “There is a bit of a fear of it happening again, but it is one of those things that you never hear about,” he reportedly said. “Only in movies you would hear of something like this happening.” 
   The owner of the flying school, Chuck McElwee, told reporters it was a “perfect landing.” 
   “Student — great pilot. Tower — great tower. I’m telling you, you don’t get that cooperation very often,” he said.   
