Loch Ness monster may be a really big eel
   The famed, tantalizing, elusive Loch Ness monster may be the Loch Ness … eel? 
   DNA has potentially solved the mystery while thickening the plot, as the findings of a research team from the University of Otago, in New Zealand, attest. 
   “There’s large amounts of eel DNA in Loch Ness,” Professor Neil Gemmell, a geneticist, told reporters at a press conference Thursday at the Loch Ness Centre in Drumnadrochit, on the western shore of the famed Scottish lake, which has spawned legendary tales of a monster since the sixth century A.D. “The sheer volume of it was a bit of a surprise.” 
   The team comprising researchers from Britain, Denmark, the United States, Australia and France analyzed 250 samples of eDNA, which are the fragments that species shed as they move through the world — skin, scales, feathers, fur, feces and urine. 
   The researchers did find evidence of 3,000 species, most of them microscopic, Gemmell said. But they also found DNA from humans, dogs, sheep, cattle, deer, badgers, rabbits, voles and birds. 
   What they didn’t find, Gemmell said, was dino-DNA, or any sign of an ancient reptilian presence. 
   “Is there a plesiosaur in Loch Ness? No. There is absolutely no evidence of any reptilian sequences in our samples,” Gemmell said. “So I think we can be fairly sure that there is probably not a giant scaly reptile swimming around in Loch Ness.” 
   However, some mystery still remains, even if an eel is the real deal. 
   “We don’t know if the DNA we are detecting is gigantic, from a gigantic eel, or from many small eels,” Gemmell said, according to the BBC. “We can’t discount the possibility that what people see and believe is the Loch Ness monster might be a giant eel.” 
   With his team’s discovery, the search has come full circle. 
   “It turns out was that a giant eel was one of the first ideas put out in the 1930s,” said Gemmell. 
   But given that the researchers had analyzed “literally a thimbleful” from a “very large body of water,” he added, the truth is still slippery. 
   “There may well be a monster in Loch Ness, but we didn’t find it,” Gemmell said, adding tantalizingly, “A lack of evidence is not necessarily evidence of absence.”   
