How a Political Crisis Seized Peru  Boom Times, Corruption and Chaos at the Top
LIMA, Peru — One Peruvian ex-president shot himself dead as the police arrived at his door. The head of the opposition sits in jail, under investigation herself. And for about a day this week, the president and vice president both claimed to rightfully lead Peru.
Long an anchor of stability in Latin America, Peru looked close to ungovernable.
The turmoil that has roiled the country for more than a year was on full display this week, as a clash between the current president, Martín Vizcarra, and the opposition ended with the president dissolving Congress. The opposition-led legislature had none of it, calling the vote illegal and swearing in the vice president to take over as confused Peruvians looked on.
Peru would seem an unlikely candidate for the kind of upheaval it has faced in recent years. It has been at peace since 2000, when a civil war with the Shining Path, a Maoist guerrilla group, that claimed about 69,000 lives over two decades drew to an end. That same year, President Alberto Fujimori resigned, ending eight years of dictatorship.
The democratic transition coincided with a boom in the economy, fueled by high commodity prices overseas, a growing mining sector and an expanding middle class of consumers. And while the growth has slowed, to 4 percent last year, Peru still remained a head above its neighbors in Latin America.
But Peru’s success concealed a growing conflict within its political class, and, in some ways, may have even laid the foundation for problems to come.
This week’s standoff between the president and Congress seemed to end with Mr. Vizcarra having the upper hand. By Tuesday night, the vice president had resigned her post and new elections appeared on the way. In Lima, the capital, life mostly continued as usual, with many simply waiting to see what would come next. 
But that hasn’t lifted the spirits of Alfredo Álvarez, who works at a money change shop in Lima. He predicted more chaos around the corner.
“People here are used to voting for someone because they’re into sports or because they’re pretty, and that’s why they’re here now,” he said.
Much of the political crisis can be traced to Odebrecht, a Brazilian construction firm that prospered during the boom. For decades, the company was the go-to firm for big infrastructure projects — including highways, dams and bridges — that successive presidents used to highlight their stewardship of the country.
“The economy was giving great results, but that wasn’t the case in the political realm,” said Juan de la Puente, a columnist at La República, a newspaper in Lima. The political instability created a “low-intensity ungovernability” that spanned years, he said.
But in 2016, Odebrecht admitted that it had paid hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes for contracts it had won throughout Latin America. Among those implicated by the ensuing investigations: two mayors of Lima, several lawmakers and nearly every living former Peruvian president.
The rash of investigations detonated like a bomb in Peru’s political elite. The police arrested Ollanta Humala, a former army officer who was president from 2011 to 2016, holding him in jail for months; prosecutors, seeking a 20-year sentence, accused him of having taken illegal campaign payments from Odebrecht. Alejandro Toledo, who led Peru in the early 2000s, is in jail in the United States, pending a Peruvian extradition request for charges that he took around $20 million in payments.
In April, the authorities approached the home of Alan García, Mr. Toledo’s successor, with an arrest warrant for a similar corruption case. Rather than surrender, Mr. García instead locked himself in a bedroom, pointed a gun at his head and pulled the trigger. He died at a hospital.
The instability also has created opportunities for figures who human rights groups say may oppose Peru’s democratic project.
Mr. Fujimori, the former dictator, was convicted in 2009 of human rights crimes during his rule, including the killings of 25 people by a military death squad. But in the years since, his daughter, Keiko, has mounted her own presidential bids with a populist party, the conservative Popular Force, seeking to capitalize on her father’s political legacy and allies, and potentially freeing him from jail.
She has won support among many poorer Peruvians, and seemed close to success around the start of last year in yet another scandal — this one involving the Fujimoris and Peru’s last president, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski.
After Mr. Kuczynski said a company he controlled had taken advisory fees from Odebrecht, Ms. Fujimori’s party threatened to impeach him. In response, Mr. Kuczynski issued a presidential pardon to Mr. Fujimori, now 81.
The release of the ex-dictator set off fury in Peru, and contributed to Mr. Kuczynski’s resignation months later in a separate scandal. The pardon was overturned by the courts, and Mr. Fujimori was sent back to prison.
The scandal also lifted Mr. Vizcarra, then the vice president, into Peru’s highest office, where he found himself facing a rival for the presidency this week.
Mr. Vizcarra was barely known to most Peruvians before he became their leader, and arrived with even less of a mandate to govern than his predecessor.
“His presidency is legitimate, but it is weak,” said Jo-Marie Burt, a professor of political science at George Mason University, who studies Peru. “He wasn’t elected.”
Mr. Vizcarra wasted little time, however, in beginning an anticorruption push, which he called necessary to counter the growing mistrust in government that came from the Odebrecht scandal. He called for the resignation of the country’s top prosecutor, which happened shortly thereafter, and he proposed a series of reforms to the judicial branch.
Ms. Fujimori, the president’s rival, by that time had been jailed herself in connection with the Odebrecht scandal. On Monday, her party, still seeking to block Mr. Vizcarra’s proposed reforms, planned to choose a new Constitutional Court from a list that included several candidates accused of corruption. The party also wanted to take up a motion to consider Ms. Fujimori’s release.
Mr. Vizcarra responded by dissolving Congress, something he had long threatened.
The opposition called the move illegal, saying the president had ignored proper procedure. And political observers noted some irony to his decision: Mr. Fujimori used a similar move in 1992, at the start of his dictatorship.
In response, opposition lawmakers fielded their own choice for the presidency, Mercedes Aráoz, the vice president, whom they swore in as the interim leader that night. But when it became clear the next day that Peruvian security forces backed Mr. Vizcarra, Ms. Aráoz resigned the post.
While Mr. Vizcarra appears to have won this battle, it’s unclear whether he will have any better luck than predecessors in governing the country through the next election, scheduled for Jan. 26.
This week he appeared flanked by top military officers, and was backed by the Organization of American States, a regional organization, in his dispute with Congress. And thousands of protesters came out to support him in several cities, a sign of his popularity — at least compared to the long-familiar faces in Congress.
One of his supporters in Lima included José Manuel García, an orthodontist who works in the capital’s business district, Miraflores. Dissolving Congress “seems to have been the right move,” he said.
But he added a warning about the next election: “It’s useless to close Congress so that four or five months later we have one with the same characteristics or worse.”
