Refugees’ Flight and Land Mines Spur Bangladesh Protest to Myanmar
COX’S BAZAR, Bangladesh — Bangladesh on Wednesday protested the huge influx of people fleeing violence in Myanmar and raised concerns with Myanmar’s government about reports that its military was placing land mines along the countries’ shared border.
Bangladesh “demanded immediate measures from Myanmar to de-escalate the ongoing violence,” according to a statement from the Bangladesh Foreign Ministry.
Manjurul Karim Khan Chowdhury, director general for Southeast Asia for the Foreign Ministry, issued the protest on Wednesday to Aung Myint, chargé d’affaires of the Myanmar Embassy in Dhaka.
Myanmar’s government did not issue an immediate response. Zaw Htay, a spokesman for its de facto leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, questioned who was responsible for the land mines in comments this week to Reuters, which first reported Bangladesh’s allegations. “Who can surely say those mines were not laid by the terrorists?” he asked.
More than 146,000 people are believed to have crossed from Myanmar into Bangladesh since late last month, according to the United Nations.
Nearly all are ethnic Rohingya, a Muslim group that has long faced oppression and denial of citizenship rights in Buddhist-majority Myanmar. The surge across the border followed Aug. 25 attacks by a Rohingya militant group on police stations and a military base in Rakhine State.
Rohingya witnesses who have reached Bangladesh say that the military and vigilante mobs of ethnic Rakhine have torched dozens of villages and sprayed bullets at fleeing residents. Satellite photos have shown many fires in the area, which is unusual given the current monsoon conditions, Human Rights Watch said.
At least 15 members of the Myanmar security forces and 370 members of the militant group have been killed, the government says.
The violence has touched off an exodus of desperate people, carrying children and scant possessions as they cross the border on foot. Land mines have increased their risk.
One woman was injured in a land mine explosion Monday, and two siblings were hurt in another blast Tuesday, said Maj. Iqbal Ahmed of the Border Guard Bangladesh. Another two children were injured slightly when a group of Rohingya spotted land mines and threw something to set them off, he said.
The explosions occurred on Myanmar’s side of the border, Major Ahmed added. He would not comment on whether the mines were laid by the Myanmar military.
At the government-run Sadar Hospital in Cox’s Bazar, some of the Rohingya who had been admitted “had injuries consistent with land mine explosions,” said Dr. Shaheen Abdur Rahman Chowdhury, the resident medical officer.
One of the injured, Hobaid, who uses one name, was admitted to Sadar Hospital with a gunshot wound in the chest and land mine injuries.
He was hurt Friday in Maungdaw Township in Myanmar, near the Bangladeshi border crossing of Tumbru, his brother Kojail said. Three men were killed when the land mine exploded, and four were injured, Kojail said.
“What is happening to our people is monstrous,” said their father, Aktar Hussan, 70. “We don’t know if things will ever get better. All we can do is to rely on almighty Allah.”
The Myanmar military has, for decades, been accused of using land mines in conflicts with ethnic armies. Myanmar is one of 35 countries that have not joined an international treaty banning antipersonnel mines. Rebel militias, like the Kachin Independence Army in Myanmar’s north, have also been accused of using land mines. Civilians are often the victims.
In addition to land mines, people trying to cross the border face other dangers. Last week, at least 46 Rohingya died when their boats sank while crossing a river between the two countries.
Even for those who have crossed safely into Bangladesh, grim conditions await. The Bangladesh government estimated that 400,000 Rohingya refugees were already in the country before the latest influx began.
The arrival of so many people in such a short time has put aid groups under extreme pressure, and camps for them at a “breaking point” because of a lack of space, Duniya Aslam Khan, spokeswoman for the United Nations’ refugee agency, said Tuesday.
“Those who have made it to Bangladesh are in poor condition,” she added. “Most have walked for days from their villages — hiding in jungles, crossing mountains and rivers with what they could salvage from their homes. They are hungry, weak and sick.”
Rohingya who remain in Rakhine State in Myanmar face an even bleaker picture, aid groups say, with dwindling food and continuing military raids on their villages. The Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army, the Rohingya militant group that claimed responsibility for the Aug. 25 attacks, has also blocked some men and boys from leaving, refugees in Bangladesh said.
The government of Myanmar said Wednesday that more than 26,000 people had been displaced in Rakhine State, but that figure does not include Rohingya civilians.
The government of Myanmar has denied that its military is attacking civilians in Rakhine State. Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi said Tuesday that security forces were carrying out a campaign against terrorists while protecting residents of the area.
“We know very well, more than most, what it means to be deprived of human rights and democratic protection,” she said during a phone call with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, according to her office. “So we make sure that all the people in our country are entitled to protection of their rights as well as the right to, and not just political, but social and humanitarian defense.”
Mr. Erdogan, who last week called the violence against the Rohingya “genocide,” told her the humanitarian crisis was rousing public anger, Turkish news media reported. Turkey later announced it would send aid to Rakhine State.
Governments from several other predominantly Muslim countries, including Pakistan, Malaysia and Indonesia, have also expressed concern. Malala Yousafzai of Pakistan, the youngest Nobel Peace Prize laureate, also confronted Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi on Twitter.
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi complained to Mr. Erdogan of “a huge iceberg of misinformation calculated to create a lot of problems between different communities and with the aim of promoting the interest of the terrorists.”
Mehmet Simsek, the deputy prime minister of Turkey, posted last month on Twitter that the world was “turning a blind eye to ethnic cleansing” in Myanmar. Among the photos he posted were some from other events and other countries.
A sea of unverified postings have purported to show bloodshed in Rakhine State. Large numbers of recently created Twitter accounts have also hurled abuse at reporters and staff members of nongovernmental organizations posting anything seen as sympathetic toward the Rohingya or playing down the violence of the Rohingya militants.
