Son of an Ohio Steelworker, Now Palestinian Envoy to the U.N.
UNITED NATIONS — The life of Riyad H. Mansour, the Palestinian ambassador to the United Nations, has been shaped by the conflict with Israel. But he is also a child of the American antiwar movement.
His father, a Palestinian refugee, came to the United States in the 1950s, found employment as an Ohio steelworker and later brought over Mr. Mansour and the family’s six other children from Ramallah, in the West Bank.
When Mr. Mansour attended college in Ohio, he plunged into student activism. He marched not only to protest Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and other land seized in the 1967 war but also for civil rights and to get the United States out of Vietnam.
His circle of contacts, he said, included antiwar activists like Tom Hayden and Jane Fonda. He once helped lead a demonstration at Kent State University against a speech by the Ku Klux Klan’s grand wizard, David Duke.
“When you’re young, you’re radical,” Mr. Mansour, the top representative of the Palestinians at the United Nations for the past 14 years, said in an interview. “I was happy to be involved.”
At 72, Mr. Mansour likes to cite his background as a steelworker’s son to underline his humble roots. But he is better known as a leading critic of both Israel and the United States for what he sees as their collaboration to foil Palestinian statehood.
Mr. Mansour has dismissed a still-secret Middle East peace plan devised by President Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, as well as this week’s American-sponsored Palestinian investment conference in Bahrain, billed by the Trump administration as a $50 billion economic foretaste of its peace plan.
“The underlying assumption of this meeting is not congruent with the rights of the Palestinian people, and the issue is not money,” he said. “You cannot prolong occupation by giving us Band-Aids of some money.”
Long involved in Palestinian politics, Mr. Mansour began his professional career as a research assistant at Youngstown State University, his alma mater. He moved into diplomacy in 1983 as the deputy in what was then the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations.
Mr. Mansour detoured from diplomatic life starting in 1994, joining the management of an Orlando investment firm and teaching at the University of Central Florida, among other pursuits. He returned to the United Nations in 2005 as ambassador of the Palestinian observer mission, which was not then regarded by the global body as representing a state.
He is perhaps best known for tactics advancing the cause of Palestinian statehood in ways that have bypassed Israel. Seven years after his return to the United Nations, the body recognized Palestine as a nonmember observer state, an upgrade that gave the Palestinians the right to join global treaties and groups including the International Criminal Court, and one that angered Israeli officials and their American allies.
In Mr. Mansour’s view, such tactics are necessary because direct talks between Israel and the Palestinians have done little and, he says, Mr. Trump has corrupted the United States as a mediator.
Breaking with decades of American policy, Mr. Trump relocated the United States Embassy last year from Tel Aviv to the holy city of Jerusalem — which the Palestinians also want as their future capital. This year Mr. Trump terminated American funding to the United Nations agency that helps the roughly five million Palestinians who are registered as refugees.
This month, the American ambassador to Israel, David M. Friedman, suggested in an interview with The New York Times that Israel could annex parts of the West Bank, where Israeli settlements are regarded by much of the world as illegal.
Such steps, Mr. Mansour said, all point to what he called an unacceptable outcome from Mr. Kushner’s long-awaited peace plan.
“For those who think they are the masters of the art of the deal, in a relationship of two, if you give one side all these free gifts, what is the incentive for the other one to negotiate the crumbs?” Mr. Mansour said, referring to Mr. Trump and his advisers on the Middle East.
It would be an understatement to say that Mr. Mansour has not been on speaking terms with Ambassador Danny Danon, his Israeli counterpart at the United Nations. Mr. Danon urged the Palestinians to adopt a different approach in a New York Times opinion piece on Monday in which he asked, “What’s wrong with Palestinian surrender?”
Israeli officials say Mr. Mansour infuriated Mr. Danon three years ago during a Security Council meeting by refusing to condemn militant Palestinian attacks. This past April, as Mr. Danon spoke to the council about Jewish connections to disputed lands claimed by Israel, the Israelis accused Mr. Mansour of rudely walking out.
The rancor has not always been so strong between Mr. Mansour and Israel’s diplomats. He had a far more cordial relationship with Dan Gillerman, the Israeli ambassador at the United Nations from 2003 to 2008. They once engaged in a testy exchange outside the Security Council in 2006 but ended up shaking hands. And in a gesture that touched Mr. Gillerman, Mr. Mansour attended his end-of-tour reception.
Yossi Beilin, a longtime Israeli politician who played a central role in the Oslo Accords, the basis for talks between the Israelis and Palestinians, noted the significance of the gesture. “The fact that Mansour decided to come to the farewell party of our ambassador was very telling,” he said. “He wanted to show there are differences, but there are prospects for cooperation and peace.”
Mr. Beilin, an outspoken advocate of a two-state solution to the conflict, said he had met Mr. Mansour several times over the years and held him in high regard.
“This is the kind of adversary whom you want to be with,” Mr. Beilin said. “There are different views, but you feel the goal is the same.”
There is little doubt that Mr. Mansour is well liked by many diplomats at the United Nations. He is greeted warmly when he walks the halls. When the Trump administration announced in late 2017 that it would move the American Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, the 193-member General Assembly voted overwhelmingly to condemn the change, in what was seen as a morale boost, at least, to the Palestinians.
And last year, the nonmember observer state of Palestine was chosen as the 2019 leader of the largest bloc of developing nations in the General Assembly, known as the Group of 77, giving Mr. Mansour a more influential gavel and further irritating Israeli leaders.
“They’re still denying we are a state,” Mr. Mansour said at the time. “We walk like a state. We quack like a state. Therefore, we are a state.”
Mr. Mansour spent his childhood as a refugee in Ramallah before coming to the United States, where he became an American citizen, attended college and met his future wife, Caryl, an American of Polish and Italian descent. They have two grown children.
He is also a grandfather and amateur golfer, and he has advanced degrees in psychology and philosophy. Had he stayed in Ohio, he said, “I would have been a clinical psychologist.”
Mr. Mansour said he marvels at how, having lived in the United States for more than a half century, he has become a patriarchal figure in a diverse extended family that includes Japanese-American in-laws.
“That’s a typical American story — everybody came from somewhere, and brought other families, and they start growing,” Mr. Mansour said. “That is the story.”
He recalled how his father, who won a lottery spot under an American government program to emigrate to the United States, was able to establish roots in Ohio, go to work in the steel mills and later become a shopkeeper. His father would send money back to Ramallah to help his mother and siblings.
His mother, whom he described as the person “who taught me all good things,” never moved to the United States, and died in Ramallah. His father retired in Ramallah, where he also died.
Asked if he was an optimistic person, Mr. Mansour said he had to remain positive — there was no other choice. He called himself “a prisoner of hope,” quoting a passage he had read recently by Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the South African anti-apartheid leader.
“I like that line,” he said, “and I’m using it more often now.”
