Rick Perry Skirts Question of Trump’s Stance on Climate Change
TOKYO — With President Trump coming under international criticism for his decision to withdraw the United States from the Paris climate accord, his actual views on climate change remain a mystery.
Does he believe, as he has repeatedly stated on Twitter, that global warming is a hoax? Or does he acknowledge that the climate is changing and that “pollutants” are involved, as Nikki R. Haley, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, said on CNN over the weekend?
Those who seek to determine what, exactly, the president believes are “chasing a rabbit down a hole,” said Rick Perry, the United States secretary of energy, speaking to reporters in Tokyo on Monday.
Mr. Perry, who was in the capital for a three-day visit to discuss nuclear power and liquid natural gas exports with Japanese officials, said the United States would “continue to be a leader in the climate issue.”
But, he added, “This deflection of ‘Oh, let’s go talk about do you really think that you have a president that believes in the climate at this level,’ well, then, I’m sorry, I’m just not going to participate in that. I’m going to tell you: Watch us.”
Ever since Mr. Trump announced last week that he would abandon the agreement for environmental action that was signed by 195 nations, most of his aides have deflected questions about whether the president believes in climate change and the role of human activity in global warming.
Under repeated questioning on “Fox News Sunday,” Scott Pruitt, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, declined to say whether the president believed that human activity had an influence or whether that activity should be controlled. Ms. Haley told CNN that the president “believes the climate is changing,” and that “pollutants are part of that equation.”
In Tokyo, Mr. Perry declined to indicate whether he had encouraged the president to remain in the accord. But he said it “was an agreement with no teeth.”
“Don’t show me a piece of paper that you’ve signed and good intentions,” Mr. Perry said. “What is that old saying about the road to hell?”
In Japan, government officials have expressed disappointment with Mr. Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Paris accord. Koichi Yamamoto, the environment minister, told reporters last week that Mr. Trump had “turned his back on the wisdom of human beings.”
But supporters of renewable energy in Japan said they hoped states, cities and companies in the United States would continue to address global warming. “Even after this Trump administration announcement, most of the businesspeople will not change their minds or opinions,” said Kentaro Tamura, principal researcher at the Institute for Global Environmental Strategies in Kanagawa.
Mr. Perry said he hoped China would “take this as an opportunity to step forward and be a real leader.” But he added that American companies would continue to develop new green technologies, regardless of the Paris agreement.
“Is the climate changing? Yes,” Mr. Perry said. “Is man having an impact? Yes. How are we going to address it going forward? And the answer is, that’s not going to change. The United States is still going to be very engaged in that.”
Asked whether Mr. Trump agreed with him, Mr. Perry said: “That’s what I believe and I’m telling you the United States is still going to be a leader in technologies and innovation that make a real difference in the air that we breathe.”
