In Britain, Fissures That Can’t Be Blamed on Brexit
LONDON — With fond memories of his time in Italy as a student, Ted Bainsfair voted for Britain to remain in the European Union in last June’s referendum, and was disappointed to find himself on the losing side. But that was then.
Mr. Bainsfair, 27, now says he wants to get on with withdrawal, known as Brexit, even if it means a clean break with the bloc.
“I have got to the point where I don’t really care — it’s not going to be reversed,” he said reflecting on the Brexit vote, while standing outside the Landor pub on a recent sunny afternoon. “It happened. I accept it, and I want to get it over and done with.”
Britons are preparing to vote again on Thursday, this time in a general election, before detailed talks on Brexit, arguably the country’s most important negotiations since World War II. But even in Vauxhall, a sprawling slice of multicultural south London — where almost eight out of 10 votes cast in the referendum were for remaining in the union — many just want to get on with it. And they have turned their attention to other issues.
A year after the acrimonious referendum that cleaved the country in two, Britain remains deeply split — just not about Europe.
“I don’t think I have ever known Britain more divided,” said Alastair Campbell, once the media strategist for the former prime minister, Tony Blair, reflecting on the political legacy of last June’s vote for withdrawal.
The referendum exposed deep splits between young people, who largely voted to remain, and their elders, many more of whom wanted to quit. Cosmopolitan cities at ease with immigration, like London and Manchester, voted to stay. Smaller towns and cities, which had fewer benefits from globalization, were more likely to want out. Scotland and Northern Ireland voted against Brexit; England and Wales went the opposite way.
One year on, Mr. Campbell points out that Britain still faces simmering resentment between London and the rest of the country, a dissonance between old and young voters, and tensions between Scotland and England.
Less partisan observers than Mr. Campbell agree. When one survey rated support for the Labour Party among 18- to 24-year-olds at 73 percent, while 64 percent of those over 65 favored the Conservatives, Matthew Goodwin, professor of politics and international relations at the University of Kent, posted a pithy observation on Twitter.
“Britain, basically, in a chart,” he wrote.
Prime Minister Theresa May called Thursday’s snap election to try to strengthen her parliamentary majority before the difficult negotiations on Brexit, which she opposed during the referendum, but now champions.
Yet, her appeals to the country to unify behind her have fallen flat, according to Jonathan Portes, professor of economics and public policy at King’s College, London.
“I don’t see any reason to believe that the country is less divided,” he said. “Theresa May’s rhetoric about uniting the country behind her is not credible, the country clearly isn’t, and probably the more they see of Theresa May, the less likely they are to identify with her.”
As Mr. Portes sees it, the referendum focused attention on divisions, rather than creating them.
“People had always known that they were there,” he said, “but the referendum threw them into sharp relief in a way that was not clear before, because of the British political system,” referring to voting rules that make it very hard for minority or niche parties to win parliamentary seats.
The polarization of public opinion helps explain why the Labour Party’s left-wing agenda, including some nationalization and increased spending on health and education, has proved more popular than many expected.
The Conservatives have appealed to more nationalist-minded voters by demanding a clean break with the European Union and pledging to curb immigration.
In Scotland, the debate over independence, which was rejected in a referendum in 2014, has been rekindled. The Conservative Party, which opposes breaking up the United Kingdom, expects to make modest gains on Thursday. But there is little doubt that the pro-independence Scottish National Party will emerge victorious.
In England, the anger of some pro-Europeans, which was expressed after the referendum, has subsided. According to surveys, perhaps half of the 48 percent who wanted to remain are what some pollsters have called “re-leavers,” those who think that the decision has been made, and that the best course is to get on with Brexit.
That sentiment has been encouraged by the political debate. Mrs. May’s Conservatives now embrace Brexit, and the Labour Party, led by the left-winger, Jeremy Corbyn, accepts it. That leaves the Liberal Democrats as the main critics of Brexit in England. Yet they have just nine parliamentary seats out of 650 and no prospect of winning the election.
“If you have both the prime minister and the leader of the Labour Party saying Brexit is going to happen, then it is very hard for voters to see how it is not going to happen,” Mr. Campbell said.
James Morris, a senior director at Edelman, a communications marketing firm that helped conduct focus group research on re-leavers, has another explanation for why the 48 percent have vanished. The Brexit referendum, he argues, forced Britons into a binary choice over an issue on which relatively few felt strongly.
“There is an assumption behind it that voters in some way ought to treat Brexit like the biggest deal in politics,” he said. But, he said, “Unlike health or education or the cost of living, it is not something people see as intrinsically important.”
“It makes perfect sense for people to fall back to focusing on what they normally worry about,” he added.
From this perspective, the European Union was primarily a scapegoat for a host of resentments, from globalization to the state of schools and hospitals.
“Brexit was always as much a symptom as it was a cause,” said Nick Clegg, former deputy prime minister and a member of the Liberal Democrats, who represents the electoral district of Sheffield Hallam, in the north of England. “I found, on my patch, in Yorkshire, people were saying they would vote against the European Union, to poke London in the eye. They expressed their frustration with London by voting against Brussels.”
“There never was 48 percent of the country champing at the bit to rise as a revolutionary mass against Brexit; no one should have expected that,” he added, noting “weariness among voters about voting at all, let alone having to revisit the acrimony of the referendum last year.”
That is part of the story in Vauxhall where Kate Hoey, a lawmaker from the opposition Labour Party, who represents the area, campaigned in favor of Brexit, despite the pro-European Union views of the overwhelming majority of her constituents.
In his campaign office, her staunchly pro-European challenger, George Turner, of the Liberal Democrats, thinks he has a good chance of defeating Ms. Hoey because of her views on Europe. Mr. Turner shows attack leaflets featuring pictures of Ms. Hoey campaigning alongside Nigel Farage, the controversial former leader of the populist, right-wing Independence Party in Britain, leading advocate of Brexit and vocal supporter of President Trump.
“The kind of vision of the country presented by the Brexiteers — this cold and old, gray, country that they want to return to — simply isn’t what people want here,” Mr. Turner said, describing the Vauxhall contest as “a fight for our soul.”
Yet while Mr. Turner thinks he can win here, he accepted that Ms. Hoey’s majority was so large that he had a “mountain to climb.”
At the Café Cairo, the owner, David Lodge, who voted to remain in the E.U., recalls being demoralized and depressed by the vote for Brexit, and laments the lack of clarity over the Brexit strategies of the Conservative and Labour parties.
“It’s so tricky. It’s yet another vote where we are all very confused about what to do,” said Mr. Lodge, 58, who, nonetheless, is thinking of supporting Labour.
James Shaddock, 29, said he voted against Brexit and would support the Liberal Democrats. But another anti-Brexit voter, Marie-Therese Nlandu, 64, said she didn’t know how to vote, and thought many others were in a quandary, too.
“The country,” she said, after a thoughtful pause, ”is very divided.”
