Marianne Williamson was kept waiting again during DNC debate, then has no idea what to say
   Author, spiritual adviser and presidential long-shot Marianne Williamson waited nearly half an hour to field a question in the first DNC debate in June and a few minutes longer than that during Tuesday’s debate . 
   Once she finally got in the game, the “A Return to Love” writer did everything she could to keep up during a fast and furious segment about health care. 
   “I admire what senator Warren said and Bernie said,” a slightly frazzled Williamson answered. “But I have to say, I have — I’m normally way over there with Bernie and Elizabeth on this one. I hear the others, and I have some concern about that, as well. And I do have concern about what the Republicans would say and that’s not just a Republican talking point. I do have concern that it will be difficult. I have concern that it will make it harder to win, and I have a concern that it will make it harder to govern because if that’s our big fight…” 
   CNN’s moderator Jake Tapper thanked her and moved on to South Bend, Ind. Mayor Pete Buttigieg. 
   Nearly 20 minutes later, when Williamson’s name was called, she organized her thoughts and let rip. 
   “Everything we are talking about is what’s wrong with American politics and the Democratic party needs to understand we talk not just about symptoms but also about causes,” she said. “When we’re talking about health care, we need to talk about more than just the health care plan. We need to realize we have a sickness care, rather than a health care system.” 
   When her time was up on that turn, Williamson said she wanted to weigh-in on immigration, which many of the other candidates had just discussed without her. 
   “I hope you come back to me this time,” she quipped. 
   Williamson said very little when her fellow DNC candidates debated in June, but was widely mocked for saying her first order of business would be calling the prime minister of New Zealand and vowed to beat President Trump with love.   
