Norman G. Dyhrenfurth, an explorer and filmmaker who in 1963 led the first expedition of Americans to reach the summit of Mount Everest, a feat that inspired generations of mountaineers, died on Sunday in Salzburg, Austria. He was 99.
The death, at a hospital, was confirmed by Michael Bilic, a friend. Mr. Dyhrenfurth had retired to Salzburg.
A climber since his childhood in the foothills of the Swiss Alps, Mr. Dyhrenfurth (pronounced DEER-en-furth) was the financial and organizational catalyst behind the expedition that enabled James W. Whittaker to climb 29,028 feet and plant a flag on the summit of Everest on May 1, 1963. He was the first American to do so.
Although Mr. Dyhrenfurth did not himself reach the summit, he was recognized as the leader of the expedition, a feat that was recognized on the cover of Life and National Geographic magazines and honored by President John F. Kennedy, who awarded the climbers a medal.
The summit had been scaled only twice before — by the New Zealand mountaineer and explorer Edmund Hillary and his Sherpa guide Tenzing Norgay in 1953, and by a Swiss team in 1956.
“There is no guarantee we’ll make it,” Mr. Dyhrenfurth said in preparing for the trip, which took two and a half years to plan and cost $326,000 (about $2.6 million today), partly financed by the National Geographic Society in Washington. “Anyone who does guarantee it is either a fool or a confidence man. We may fail.”
Indeed, Mr. Dyhrenfurth had failed several times. He was the cameraman for a 1952 Swiss expedition that saw Raymond Lambert, accompanied by Mr. Norgay, get within 800 feet of Everest’s summit. In 1955, he tried and failed to climb Lhotse, the world’s fourth-highest mountain, also in the Himalayas. And in 1958, he roamed that range in an unsuccessful search for signs of the mythical animal known as the yeti. (He was convinced it existed and was a species of large ape.)
Mr. Dyhrenfurth’s breakthrough began in May 1960, when he was the cameraman for a Swiss-Austrian expedition to Dhaulagiri, a Himalayan massif that includes the world’s seventh-highest mountain.
The next month, he sought permission from Nepal’s government for an American expedition to climb Mount Everest. He received a permit in May 1961.
He recruited a team that, by the start of the climb in February 1963, had grown to 19 members, including climbers, scientists and photographers. They were supported by some 900 porters carrying about 26 tons of food, clothing, equipment and scientific instruments.
But a big disagreement arose, as a National Geographic article in 2012 recounted.
Two of the climbers — Thomas F. Hornbein, an anesthesiologist, and Willi Unsoeld, a Peace Corps director — argued that climbing in Mr. Hillary’s footsteps was too modest a goal, and urged trying a new but more dangerous route, the West Ridge.
Mr. Dyhrenfurth said that getting an American to the top was the priority, and that Mr. Hillary’s route, the South Col, was the more certain — if less adventurous — path. Mr. Whittaker sided with Mr. Dyhrenfurth.
The climb was far from smooth. On March 23, an icefall buried and killed one climber, Jake Breitenbach. Mr. Dyhrenfurth, who was praised for his democratic and team-oriented leadership style, called a meeting at which the collective decision was made to continue the expedition.
As the team approached the so-called Death Zone, a region of thin air above 25,000 feet, one climber suffered pulmonary edema, another a blood clot.
Mr. Dyhrenfurth decided that Mr. Whittaker and a Sherpa guide, Nawang Gombu, would make the first assault on the summit, while two other climbers — Luther G. Jerstad, a college drama teacher, and Barry C. Bishop, a National Geographic Society cameraman — would make the second.
Stumbling forward, and battling 60-mile-an-hour winds and a windchill factor of roughly minus 85 to minus 90 degrees Fahrenheit, Mr. Whittaker and Mr. Gombu staggered to the summit. They had run out of oxygen and spent only 20 minutes at the top before starting the treacherous journey back down.
Mr. Dyhrenfurth and another Sherpa, Ang Dawa, had stayed at the high camp. The next morning, all four returned to the base camp.
The men had made a pact not to divulge which of them made it to the top first, but word got out, and soon there was a telegram from President Kennedy. The news — “Americans Reach Everest Summit” — made the front page of The New York Times.
On May 22, Mr. Jerstad and Mr. Bishop made it to the summit. They were followed a few hours later by Mr. Hornbein and Mr. Unsoeld, who had reached it via the West Ridge, itself a major accomplishment given the hazards.
Several of the men were still recovering from frostbite when Kennedy presented them with the National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal on July 8, 1963. A film Mr. Dyhrenfurth made of the climb, “Americans on Everest,” narrated by Orson Welles, opened the National Geographic Society’s 1965 television season.
Norman Gunther Dyhrenfurth was born on May 7, 1918, in Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland), to two accomplished Himalayan climbers, Günter and Hettie Dyhrenfurth. His father was also a geology professor.
The family left for Austria in the 1920s and then settled in Switzerland, where they became citizens, before emigrating to the United States in the late 1930s.
Mr. Dyhrenfurth made money as a ski instructor and mountain guide and became known for climbing many mountains, including Mount St. Agnes in Alaska, the Teton Range in Wyoming and the White Mountains of New Hampshire.
He served in the Army during World War II and became a United States citizen. He taught film at the University of California, Los Angeles; was a Fulbright scholar in Italy in 1953-54; and for a time supervised the motion picture division of General Dynamics in San Diego. He was later a technical adviser to movies about climbing, including “The Eiger Sanction” (1975), starring Clint Eastwood, and “Five Days One Summer” (1982), starring Sean Connery.
He is survived by his longtime partner, Maria Sernetz.
At a reunion organized by the American Alpine Club in 2013, Mr. Dyhrenfurth joined several other living members of the 1963 expedition, including Mr. Whittaker, who later ran the outdoor outfitting company REI, and Mr. Hornbein, who remained an anesthesiologist.
At the reunion, Mr. Dyhrenfurth recalled that some people had been skeptical when he first proposed the climb
“Americans, when I first raised it, they said, ‘Well, Everest, it’s been done. Why do it again?’ ”
