He’s a Real Contender to Lead Congo, if Only He Could Get In
NAIROBI, Kenya — Moïse Katumbi, the opposition leader in the Democratic Republic of Congo, has everything a presidential candidate needs: money, a strong record in government, nationwide recognition and, to top it all off, a wildly popular soccer club.
Yet Mr. Katumbi lacks one vital element: He has not set foot in the country for a year — and is threatened with arrest, or worse, should he try to return.
President Joseph Kabila, who has run the country for 16 years and is reluctant to leave power, regards him as his greatest threat. So Mr. Katumbi, who faces prison time for what he says are politically motivated charges against him, has been playing a drawn-out guessing game with his supporters, who are growing impatient over when exactly he plans to return.
Since he left the country last May, Mr. Katumbi has been living in exile in Brussels, between vacations in Athens and stays in luxury hotels in London.
This week, the president came under renewed pressure to let him back in the country after a letter by an influential group of Catholic bishops, the Congolese Episcopal Conference, urged Mr. Kabila to allow Mr. Katumbi to “return as a free man and exercise his civil and political rights.”
The bishops brokered a deal in December to prod Mr. Kabila to step down after he refused to hold constitutionally mandated elections last year. His refusal set off a new political crisis in the country, which has been long blighted by popular uprisings and clashes between government forces and local militias opposed to his rule.
Mr. Katumbi welcomed the bishops’ letter. “I plan to return soon,” he said in a telephone interview on Thursday.
“I have nothing to fear,” he insisted, but he refused to specify a timetable for his long-awaited homecoming. He said he intended to speak first to other opposition members of the umbrella group Rassemblement. “The suffering, the corruption — the people can’t take it anymore.”
Congo is extraordinarily rich in minerals and for that reason has long been pillaged by foreign powers, successive leaders and an alphabet soup of rebel groups. Given its size — by some measures it is as large as Western Europe — the country has an enormous impact on the rest of the continent, with a long history of conflicts that have drawn in its armies and fighters from many African nations in recent decades.
Now, the question of Mr. Katumbi’s return is gaining urgency. Mr. Kabila has succeeded in keeping his opponents not only out of the way, but out of the country. In addition to Mr. Katumbi, there was Étienne Tshisekedi, a charismatic opposition leader for four decades who died in February. The body of Mr. Tshisekedi, who was 84, is in a morgue in Brussels and has not been allowed back home for a proper burial.
In a nation rattled by flare-ups of violence, most recently the brutal murders of two United Nations experts, many Congolese are on tenterhooks about Mr. Katumbi’s return.
“Political maneuvers are Kabila’s adored game,” said Oscar Rashidi, president of the Congolese League Against Corruption and Fraud, a nongovernmental group. “But he knows that Mr. Katumbi is the most revered politician after Mr. Tshisekedi,” Mr. Rashidi said, and “the presence in the country of Katumbi will sound the end of the regime of Kabila for sure.”
Mr. Katumbi, a former ally of Mr. Kabila who in 2015 resigned as the governor of the mineral-rich Katanga Province over political differences, is awaiting trial on allegations that he recruited mercenaries. He has already been sentenced to three years in prison on accusations that he seized a building belonging to a Greek citizen. He denies both allegations.
In the letter, leaked to the news media and seen by The New York Times, the clerics assailed Mr. Katumbi’s criminal conviction and urged the government to drop orders to have him arrested immediately upon his return.
“The two trials are simply a farce,” the letter signed by the bishops said. It added that their own investigation had found that the charges against Mr. Katumbi were trumped up, “with the sole goal of bringing him to trial and convicting him.” The proceedings, the letter said, were “purely a political settling of scores.”
The letter also called for similar charges to be dropped against Jean-Claude Muyambo, another political opponent.
The government rejected the bishops’ claims. Célestin Tunda Ya Kasende, a spokesman for the governing party, said the bishops should not offer “privileged treatment for tie-wearing criminals,” referring to Mr. Katumbi and Mr. Muyambo.
But for many Congolese, a tie-wearing businessman who vows to fight corruption and run Congo like a well-disciplined soccer club is just what the country needs.
Pascal Mwasa, a fruit vendor in Kinshasa, the capital, said that “we want change” but that it was hard to find people who “will resist the corruption of Kabila.”
“Moise Katumbi is a rich man and will not accept to be corrupt and let the population suffer,” Mr. Mwasa said.
