Summits of Adversaries  They Haven’t Always Worked Out So Well
Kennedy would chide himself afterward for not doing his homework on Khrushchev. Nixon was unsure if he would even meet Mao despite months of quiet planning. And George W. Bush made what in hindsight was a classic first-impression misread of Vladimir V. Putin.
President Trump’s abrupt decision last week to agree to meet North Korean leader Kim Jong-un within two months is a stunning change, after almost seven decades of hostility between two countries that never formally ended the 1950-53 Korean War.
But Mr. Trump will not be the first modern-day American president to come face-to-face with the leader of an adversary, and those encounters have a mixed record. Here are some examples:
It was a crucial moment in the Cold War when President John F. Kennedy met Nikita S. Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, for informal talks to improve relations between two increasingly polarized nations.
The one and only summit meeting between the two did not have the outcome the president might have wanted, in part because Kennedy was ill-prepared, he later revealed to a journalist.
There were no clear strategic goals for the meeting, something that historians say contributed to the nebulous result. The two leaders bickered over which country had spent more time manipulating elections, according to historical accounts of the meeting, and they argued over the merits of capitalism and communism.
“I never met a man like this,” Kennedy told Hugh Sidey of Time magazine. Kennedy said he “talked about how a nuclear exchange would kill 70 million people in 10 minutes, and he just looked at me as if to say, ‘So what?’”
Khrushchev told Kennedy it would be up to the United States to decide if there would be war or peace between the two nations.
“Then, Mr. Chairman,” Kennedy responded, “there will be war. It will be a cold winter.”
Relations quickly grew more hostile. The Berlin Wall was erected a few months later, dividing the city between communist East and capitalist West. James Reston of The New York Times wrote in his memoir, “Deadline,” that the president came out of the meeting determined to show toughness.
“And the place to do it, he remarked to my astonishment, was Vietnam!” Mr. Reston recalled.
President Richard M. Nixon’s weeklong visit to China was the pivotal event that ended the Cold War hostility between China and the United States. It looked like a contradiction at the time: the American politician who had risen to fame as a virulent anti-communist was venturing into the world’s most populous communist country. But as Nixon himself had conceded years earlier, “We simply cannot afford to leave China outside the family of nations.”
As he departed Washington for Beijing, Nixon was not even sure he would meet the Chinese leader, Mao Zedong.
But it was not a spur-of-the-moment trip. On the contrary, it had taken months of secret discussions, which began in April 1971 when the United States table-tennis team arrived in China.
In what became known as Ping-Pong diplomacy, the team’s groundbreaking visit led to a clandestine trip to China by Henry A. Kissinger, Nixon’s national security adviser, that laid the groundwork for Nixon’s arrival. Premier Zhou Enlai of China said, “Never before in history has a sport been used so effectively as a tool of international diplomacy.”
The Cold War-era meeting between President Ronald Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, then secretary general of the Soviet Communist Party, was the first time in six years that leaders of the two nuclear superpowers had come face to face.
“We met, as we had to meet,” Mr. Reagan said upon his return to Washington. “I had called for a fresh start and we made that start. I can’t claim we had a meeting of the minds on such fundamentals as ideology or national purpose — but we understand each other better. That’s the key to peace.”
Little substantive decision-making came from the summit meeting, but both said they would use it to jump-start greater cooperation.
The next time the pair met, in Reykjavik, Iceland, in October 1986, the outcome was less positive. They failed to come to an agreement on arms control after Gorbachev insisted the talks include regulating America’s Strategic Defense Initiative — the so-called Star Wars antimissile defense system — a project Mr. Reagan had embraced. Talks between the two countries would not resume for more than a year.
President George W. Bush, meeting Vladimir V. Putin for the first time during a June 2001 summit meeting in Slovenia, offered a surprising public display of warmth toward the Russian leader, just six months into Mr. Bush’s first term.
Confounding aides who warned that Russia respected only toughness, Mr. Bush told reporters at a news conference with Mr. Putin: “I looked the man in the eye. I found him to be very straightforward and trustworthy. We had a very good dialogue. I was able to get a sense of his soul.”
The effusive praise would later be interpreted as a sign of naïveté about Mr. Putin, the former K.G.B. spy who has come to be seen as a vexing adversary of the United States.
President Barack Obama and Cuba’s Raúl Castro met in Panama in 2015, ending a half-century in which leaders of the two countries had not come face to face.
The meeting on the sidelines of the Summit of the Americas was part of a push by Mr. Obama to normalize diplomatic relations with Cuba after generations of hostility.
“Our governments will continue to have differences,” Mr. Obama said at a news conference. “At the same time, we agreed that we can continue to take steps forward that advance our mutual interests.”
Mr. Castro praised Mr. Obama’s “humble” background and said he had read his books.
Mr. Castro’s older brother Fidel, the iconic revolutionary who took power in 1959, never met with any sitting American president while he was Cuba’s leader. When Castro visited the United States shortly after the revolution, President Dwight D. Eisenhower made a point of going to the golf course. Castro wound up meeting instead with Nixon, who was then the vice president.
