Young Slovaks Buck a Trend, Protesting to Save Their Democracy
BRATISLAVA, Slovakia — Born in 1990, Zuzana Hlavkova never knew the struggles of her parent’s generation who lived under Communism. Nor of the generation before that, witness to a world gone mad during World War II.
She was born free. Hers was a world bonded to the West and the values of democratic societies.
Now she is worried that those freedoms are at risk, and has taken to the streets along with tens of thousands across the country in the largest mass gatherings here since the 1989 Velvet Revolution.
The outpouring was initially spurred by the killing of an investigative journalist and his fiancée, both just 27 and of the same generation. But it has since turned on a government whose corruption is seen by Ms. Hlavkova and other young people as a threat to their very future.
This past week the protests forced the resignation of Prime Minister Robert Fico, but they have shown little sign of abating as the demonstrators, many of them young people, appear determined to safeguard hard-won freedoms.
“I see our generation as the post-’89 kids,” Ms. Hlavkova said. “We have now grown up, and this is our fight. Our parents fought for our freedom, and we owe it to them to win the fight against corruption.”
The tumult in Slovakia has now distinguished this country from others in the region, where a loss of faith in democracy has prompted voters to turn to populist leaders offering a strong hand as a remedy.
In Hungary and Poland, those leaders have steadily embedded networks of cronies, dismantled democratic institutions and promoted what they say are traditional, national values over Western ones.
But in Slovakia, a country smaller than West Virginia with a population of around five million, people are calling for something else: a recommitment to Western democratic values and the rule of law.
For the past three Fridays — despite freezing temperatures, snow and rain — men, women and children have demonstrated in numbers unseen since the fight to break from the yoke of the Soviet Union.
As in 1989, they have jingled their keys in the air, hoping to ring in the end of the government.
They want justice for the investigative journalist, Jan Kuciak, who was looking into government corruption when he was murdered three weeks ago, along with his fiancée, Martina Kusnirova.
But they also want a cleaning out of a government that they believe has put its self-interests and self-preservation over their future.
Even as Mr. Fico announced his resignation on Thursday, he did so with a smile. As a condition, he said his deputy must be appointed, ensuring that his party, SMER, would maintain its control over key government institutions.
“Don’t worry, I’m not going anywhere,” he said to President Andrej Kiska as he handed him his letter of resignation.
The president accepted it and authorized Peter Pellegrini, a longtime ally of Mr. Fico’s, to create a new government.
“I want to be an active leader of a political party,” Mr. Fico said later. “The only aim of this decision is to protect this country from chaos and ensure its stability.”
Mikuláš Dzurinda, the prime minister of Slovakia from 1998 to 2006 and now the president of the Wilfried Martens Center for European Studies, said that the transparency of Mr. Fico’s move was unlikely to appease the demonstrators.
“This is just a maneuver,” he said. “Mr. Pellegrini is not only his very close collaborator, but is perceived as his puppet.”
“This is why in these days, in these minutes, why frustration among the freedom fighters, among people believing in shared values, this is why frustration prevails,” he said.
He did not know how long people would continue to take to the streets, but he was optimistic that “the people will demonstrate that we are not stupid.”
Martina Cimermanova, 25, a freelance photographer living in Bratislava, first decided to join the protests after seeing how politicians responded to the outcry over the killings.
“They were so arrogant,” she said. “That was the last straw.”
On Friday, she was incensed after watching “Fico basically laughing in our face.”
Despite his resignation, she fears he will still call the shots. But like others calling for change, she is not blind to the dangers new elections could pose.
For all the democratic fervor of recent days, Slovakia has not been immune to the appeals of extremist politicians. In the last election, a far-right party with links to neo-Nazis won the most votes in its history.
“Look at what happened in Romania,” she said. “People took to the streets; they got early elections, and the same old politicians just came back.”
The same could happen here, she said.
For his part, Mr. Fico may present a confident face to the public, but in a private meeting with a delegation from the European Union recently, he expressed grave concern about the growing public unrest.
He worried that the opposition could take over, the group said in a summary of the meeting, and warned of bloody clashes, which never materialized.
In fact, the protest organizers have made it a point to keep the opposition at arms length and to remind demonstrators to remain peaceful.
On Friday, the crowd in Bratislava, the capital, was perhaps the largest yet. One man stood with an 8-month-old baby strapped to his chest. On the baby’s back was a sign: “Nine out of 10 babies recommend not to be afraid and not to steal.”
Onstage, singers, actors and activists all delivered messages calling for resilience and determination, kindness and decency. “They need to fear us,” was a common theme.
Whereas the crowd a week ago called for the end of the Fico government, it now called for the downfall of his entire political party.
The protest organizers say they are concerned about Slovakia’s democratic institutions, and for them that means seeing high-level politicians held to account.
Jan Budaj, 66, one of the lead organizers of the Velvet Revolution, applauded the demonstrators’ efforts, but said that a lack of political alliances might make it difficult to force a lasting change.
Sitting in a cafe overlooking the square, joined by other comrades in arms from the fight against Communism, he said this moment was different but no less important.
That was a revolution, but this is an evolution, he said. Change at that time came from the top, with leaders like Vaclav Havel. This time, it was coming from the ground up.
He saw it as not only important for Slovakia, but also for the region — a rejection of the illiberal drift of this country’s neighbors.
On Friday, as thousands of people gathered, he watched with pride.
“Slovakia is seeing the real birth of a political nation,” he said. “What you are seeing on the street is a nation coming closer to the West, not pulling away.”
The illusions he once may have had about Western democracy — an idealized version when viewed from behind the Iron Curtain — may have been lost long ago.
But these are the moments that truly define a nation.
“Democracy does not mean you will never have corrupt politicians,” he said. “Democracy is what you do when you discover the mayor is stealing the people’s cash.”
