The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• What are the American and Australian militaries up to in the Pacific Ocean?
• Former Prime Minister Tony Abbott stands by Cardinal George Pell — again.
• Sending Australian goods back to China could become even more lucrative.
Every other year, the United States and Australia conduct military training operations together known as the Talisman Saber exercises. This year’s began yesterday off the coast of Queensland and the Northern Territory, and they are the largest ever, with more than 30,000 Australian and American Army, Navy and Air Force personnel participating.
Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., chief of the United States Pacific Command, said the troops should strive “to be faster, more precise, more cost-effective and most importantly, more lethal.” With United States-China relations cooling — and with the Pentagon watching a Chinese buildup in the South China Sea — the exercises are a test of Australia’s ability to strike a balance in its relations with both countries.
So, what’s the real purpose of these exercises? Think of military exercises as part geopolitical symbolism, part substantive training. The weight of each aspect can vary wildly. Where does Talisman Saber fit? Somewhere on the functional end, said Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, an independent think tank. “It is very much designed to test what military people call ‘the interoperability’ of the two military forces — their capacity to work together,” he said, adding that the operations were “very demanding.”
But Talisman Saber is also meant to send a message. “You’ve got the symbolism of what is a very close alliance relationship between us and the U.S. in the Pacific,” Mr. Jennings said. And the intended recipient of that message is clear, he added. “In Canberra and in Washington, they’d be quite happy for China to take this as a statement that the alliance is healthy and strong.”
And what about Admiral Harris’s use of the phrase “more lethal”? Does language like that signal anything?
“The language sounds a bit more jarring to the ears of people who don’t live and breathe military,” said Mr. Jennings, “but it’s very much how military forces think.”
Published at [1:01 p.m. AEST]
Throwback Thursdays can be embarrassing for anyone, but Tony Abbott had a particularly bad one yesterday after the announcement of sexual assault charges against Cardinal George Pell. Mr. Abbott, a former prime minister, issued a statement offering support for Cardinal Pell that brought back memories of awkward interviews in which he was asked about their relationship.
The two men are old friends, and Mr. Abbott has cited Cardinal Pell as a mentor and defended his character over the years despite allegations about how he handled sexual abuse cases in the Roman Catholic Church.
Mr. Abbott has more personal ties to the church than most prime ministers: As a young man, he briefly trained at a seminary in Manly to enter the priesthood. He did not complete his training.
What has Mr. Abbott said about Cardinal Pell over the years?
In 2004, Mr. Abbott was grilled by Tony Jones of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation about whether he met with Cardinal Pell before the church issued a statement criticizing the opposition Labour Party’s education policy.
He denied meeting with Cardinal Pell at first, and then admitted he had.
Mr. Abbott’s quick turnaround was the source of a segment by the comedy group The Chaser. In the bit, the comedian Craig Reucassel dressed as a priest and approached Mr. Abbott on the street as he was campaigning.
“I’ve come from the Cardinal Pell. He’s very insulted you forgot his meeting,” Mr. Reucassel said. “Tell you what, let’s take a photo so you can remember this meeting. I know you forget meetings with archbishops.”
In 2012, Mr. Abbott told Fairfax Media that Cardinal Pell was “a person of significance and influence” in his life.
In 2013,  Neil Mitchell, a presenter at the radio station 3AW, spoke to Mr. Abbott about the findings of a legislative inquiry that faulted Cardinal Pell for showing reluctance to acknowledge instances of child abuse. Mr. Abbott replied:
And yesterday, Mr. Abbott’s statement said:
Published at [1:22 p.m. AEST]
The Australian Securities Exchange has given the green light for a listing by an Australian business in the lucrative “daigou” market. Daigou is the Chinese word for a purchasing agent, and it refers to a growing industry in which middlemen buy products like vitamins and infant formula in Australia and sell them in China at a high profit.
In May, we looked into how Chinese students in Australia are becoming daigous. Some analysts estimate that daigous exported products worth as much as $600 million, or nearly 800 million Australian dollars, to China last year.
Published at [1:33 p.m. AEST]
