Trump surrogate Peter Thiel dubbed ‘great ambassador’ for New Zealand despite keeping citizenship secret
   The politician who granted Peter Thiel New Zealand citizenship described the Silicon Valley billionaire as a "great ambassador" for the country despite the fact he kept his official status as a Kiwi resident secret. 
   The controversial business man — and one of the few tech luminaries to publicly support President Trump during his campaign — became a citizen in New Zealand in 2011 even though he made it clear he had no intention of living there. While most are required to reside in the island nation as a permanent resident for 1,350 days over the course of five years preceding an application, Thiel spent a mere 12 days there, The New Zealand Herald reported. 
   Nathan Guy, the Minister of Internal national affairs who approved Thiel's application due to "exceptional circumstances," defended the move on Thursday, calling the PayPal founder a "salesperson for New Zealand." 
   "He is a fine individual, good character, he has invested a lot in New Zealand, he's got great reach into the US and I'm very comfortable with the decision that I made," Guy told the Guardian. 
   Official documents cited by the outlet similarly cited Thiel's "skills as an entrepreneur and his philanthropy" as a potential benefit to New Zealand and its people. 
   In his application for citizenship, the naturalized American born in Germany promised to "represent the country on the international stage." 
   "It would give me great pride to let it be known that I am a New Zealand citizen," Thiel wrote in his 2011 application, submitted that January. 
   But the wealthy 49-year-old's New Zealand pride remained mostly under the radar until a New Yorker piece, which profiled the country as a refuge for wealthy Americans in light of a hypothetical doomsday, revealed Thiel was a client of a New Zealand real estate agent. 
   After an investigation into the matter, The New Zealand Herald revealed Thiel shelled out $10 million for property in Lake Wanaka in 2015. The purchase went unnoticed because it was made by a citizen. 
   During the application process Thiel donated $1 million to Christchurch earthquake relief fund about two months after a deadly tremor killed more than 180 people. The hefty donation and Thiel's prominent status prompted many to wonder whether he was given special treatment when his citizenship was granted. 
   Guy said it's Thiel's affiliation with Trump that's sparked the widespread interest and outcry over his citizenship in New Zealand. 
   "This story got legs because of his connection to the Trump regime. In 2011 I was unaware of that. I was presented with a file that was incredibly comprehensive," he told the Herald. 
   "And ultimately, officials came to me with the recommendation that he should be granted citizenship, and I agreed with that." 
   The question remains however, why Thiel promised to champion the country only to keep his residency secret. 
   "I can't answer that," Guy said. "That's something you'd need to get from Peter Thiel." 
   Thiel was made an official citizen of New Zealand in a private ceremony in Santa Monica in August 2011.   
