Debi Mazar says an agent told her to lie about her age
   "Younger" actress Debi Mazar says an agent once advised her to lie about her age. 
   "I've never thought about aging," she said at a Lower East Side event for her TV Land show. "I was told to lie about my age and I thought that was more disturbing." 
   Mazar is listed as 52 on Wikipedia. 
   "I come from a time where there was on IMDB or internet, so there was a time in my life where I could kind of fudge stuff," she confessed. 
   Mazar says fudging the numbers may not be her thing, but she doesn't judge actors who do what they have to do. 
   "You gotta do what you gotta do to feed your kids," she said. "You gotta hustle to get by in this life so if you've got to lie, who cares?" 
   But according to Mazar, people can guess how many years an actor has been around if they want to. 
   "They can do the math, certain movies, x amount of years ago," she said. "They can figure it out." 
   Mazar, whose movie credits include the Martin Scorsese classic "Goodfellas," is lucky that the legendary 5-foot-4-inch director isn't an inch taller. 
   "I think my favorite memory was the scene where I'm cutting coke with Ray Liotta and we were supposed to be very stoned and Marty told me to throw the scale and I threw it and I nearly hit Marty in the head with it," she recalled of a scene they filmed in Harlem. She says the scale sailed over Scorsese's head. 
   "There was so much adrenaline in the scene that I didn't really realize it at the time," she recalled. 
   Mazar was also pals with pop artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, who once gave her a very cool, albeit heavy, piece of art. 
   "I had a refrigerator that he painted and then I had a jealous roommate who painted over it," she recalled. "It wasn't worth any money at the time. He was alive and he wasn't even famous, but yeah, I had an entire refrigerator painted by him." 
   She isn't sure what Basquiat would have thought about a 1982 painting of his that sold for a record $110.5 million last month. 
   "I have a friend who says, 'Oh Jean would have thought it was gross,' but I actually think it's amazing," she admitted. 
   With Nicki Gostin, Brian Niemietz   
