Australia, Diverse and Graying. Also  Johnny Depp, and a Controversial Push to Decrypt
The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• Australia is older and more Asian, and the number of same-sex couples is rising, census data shows.
• Johnny Depp and Barnaby Joyce are arguing over dogs again.
• Is it really a good idea to let the government unlock our encrypted messages?
A little less than a year after a shaky expansion into online census-taking (which birthed #censusfail) the Australian Bureau of Statistics has released the first batch of results from its 2016 national survey.
The government’s statisticians wonderfully dub these results “a living biography we get to update every five years.”
So, what does the fresh ink show?
1. What a Diverse Country!
Australia may be the most culturally diverse country in the developed world. Around one in two Australians have at least one parent born overseas.
In fact, Australia has a higher proportion of people born overseas (26 percent) than Canada (22 percent), New Zealand (23 percent) and the United Kingdom (13 percent) — and nearly twice the proportion as in the United States (14 percent).
Despite its historic ties to Britain, overseas-born Australians are for the first time more Asian than European, and all together, Australians speak more than 300 languages and subscribe to over 100 religions.
It’s also worth noting that Australians are increasingly faithless: The number of Australians who identify with “no religion” is up to 30 percent. Christianity is still Australia’s most common religion, but it’s down from 74 percent in 1991 to 52 percent in 2016.
“I think some of it comes from the types of populations who are coming to Australia, said Edith Gray, an associate professor and head of the school of demography at Australian National University. “Some of our overseas-born population are more likely to be coming from China than in the past so some of that composition may be playing a role in the change in the structure of the religious affiliation.”
2. Home Life
For many Australians, the “Australian dream” of home ownership is looking a little more like a work in progress. Though a majority of Australians own a house with a mortgage, the proportion of people renting has increased around 20 percent since 1991. The percentage of Australians outright owning their homes has decreased to 31 percent in 2016 from 41 percent in 1991 — numbers that reflect Australia’s increasingly unaffordable housing market.
Same-sex couples can’t marry in Australia — but there are more of them: The A.B.S. counted more than 4
