That Low Hum of Racism
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
The issue of race and racism has been front and center in the United States for a few years now — with the public conversation intensifying ever since a series of high-profile killings of young black men by the police in 2014.
But how do race relations play out here in Australia?
That question will continue to shape this country. Census data released this week shows that one in two Australians are now either born overseas or have a parent who was born overseas, and that Australia’s Indigenous population has grown as well.
Isabella Kwai explored a sliver of this demographic shift in her story today, on a group of young Asian-Australians from Sydney’s western suburbs.
This week, we also published our deepest look yet at Indigenous Australia, through the eyes of a New York Times reporter who usually covers race in the United States.
John Eligon, who I worked with closely before I came to Australia, spent nearly a month traveling all over Australia and the Torres Strait Islands, visiting a wide variety of Indigenous communities.
“I heard stories of frustration and anger, resistance and resilience,” he says. “What I saw was a complex reality for Australia’s First Nations people.”
You can see the full scope of his reporting in the 60-minute documentary we produced in partnership with “Foreign Correspondent” on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, and in his New York Times article profiling three young Indigenous Australians battling stereotypes in their own ways: Zeritta Jessel in Western Australia; Bobby Salee, a young man who found autonomy on Murray Island; and Nakkiah Lui, the well-known playwright, in Sydney.
What’s striking to anyone who watches or reads what John produced is the degree to which he was able to get these people and others to open up about their lives. He drew out heartfelt stories about suicide and discrimination but also moments of pride, expertise and humor. Even in outtakes from the project that we’ve been sharing, such as this interview above with Ms. Lui, there’s an authenticity and cand
