A Controversial Lesson on Race. Also  Cardinal George Pell Charged, and Uber Drivers Fight Back.
The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• A dramatic lesson for Sydney students.
• Cardinal George Pell is charged with sexual offenses.
• Uber drivers to Uber: “We’re not contractors. We’re employees.”
On Tuesday, year-four students at St. Justin’s Catholic Primary School in Oran Park, an outer Sydney suburb, expected a day of typical learning. Instead, they were greeted by a nun, who told them that they would be taken away from their parents by the government.
Some kids cried, while others plotted how to escape. At the end of the day, the teacher told them it was a lesson on the Stolen Generations, when the Australian Parliament removed Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their parents because of discriminatory policies.
Parents of some the students were incensed and told the local news media that the lesson was emotional abuse. “When children start crying, you know you should stop,” said Natalie Wykes, whose son was in the class.
But was it abuse, or creative teaching gone wrong? Tim Gilmour, assistant to the director of schools at the Catholic Education Diocese of Wollongong, the group that oversees the school, said in an interview that the experiment started because the class was studying a well-known fictional children’s book, “The Stolen Girl.”
“What’s happened here is that the intention and execution haven’t matched up as well as they might,” he said. “We understand the criticism, and it is certainly the last thing we want to upset the students.”
“This incident reflects an attempt at experiential learning gone horribly wrong,” said Dr. Glenn Savage, a senior lecturer in education policy at the University of Melbourne. At St. Justin’s, both the parents and the school seem to agree that while the lesson was a worthy one, its implementation was questionable. It feeds into a debate, however, on how much control teachers get in the classroom, and how students are taught about the injustices of the past — or the future.
Classrooms across the world, in particular those that have complicated relationships with race and a colonial past, have walked the line between what some see as politicization and others see as education. In 1968, Jane Elliott, a third-grade teacher at an all-white school in Iowa, attempted to simulate the impact of the civil rights movement by dividing up her students based on their eye color. The experiment, which came to be known as the blue eyes/brown eyes exercise, became notorious, with teachers abroad also adopting it for their students.
These days, hot topics like climate change, sex and drug education, and even etiquette, have caused friction. In Wellsto
