12 Men Found Alive in Refrigerated Truck After Deadly Smuggling Case
LONDON — Twelve men were found alive in the refrigerated trailer of a truck in Belgium, the federal police said on Wednesday, in an echo of a similar, but deadly, case a week earlier.
The discovery of the men — 11 from Syria and one from Sudan — in the province of Antwerp came as the authorities were still scrambling to identify the bodies of 39 people found Oct. 23 in a refrigerated container in Grays, in southeastern England, which had arrived from the Belgian port of Zeebrugge. 
Jana Verdegem, a spokeswoman for the Belgian Federal Police, said the 12 men were found overnight Tuesday into Wednesday morning after the truck driver, who thought he had been transporting only fruit and vegetables, alerted the police when he became suspicious of the load he was carrying, she said.
“He suspected that people were in the back of his truck,” she said. When the federal police arrived and opened the back of the vehicle, parked in a lot on the side of a highway in Oud-Turnhout in Antwerp, they found the men.
 “They were all in good health,” Ms. Verdegem said.
The highway, the E4, stretches across Belgium from the coast near the port of Zeebrugge to the border with neighboring Netherlands. It was unclear where the 12 men hoped to end up and whether they were headed in the direction of the port in Zeebrugge. They were taken to the police station in Antwerp then handed over to the immigration authorities. 
Richard Burnett, the chief executive of Britain’s Road Haulage Association, has said that traffickers and migrants sometimes attempt to break into trailers at truck stops overnight while the drivers are asleep. They unbolt the hinges on the back of trailers so people can enter, and then reattach them so that drivers are unaware of the load they are carrying. 
The Belgian Federal Police said that, in this case, the driver had not been detained. 
Belgium is a major transit point for smugglers hoping to traffic people across the English Channel into Britain, according to the British National Crime Agency, which explained the risks in a 2018 report. 
In the case of the 39 victims found in the truck in southeastern England, the container in which they were found had been put on a ferry in Zeebrugge on Oct. 22 before being picked up in Britain the next morning. 
The victims were believed to be Vietnamese or Chinese victims of a human trafficking network, though their identities and the cause of death have yet to be confirmed. 
The driver in that case has been charged with 39 counts of manslaughter and human trafficking, and several other people linked to the case have been arrested by the British authorities and released on bail. 
Experts say people often travel inside the insulated container to avoid detection. But refrigerated containers like the ones in which the 39 bodies were found last week and the 12 men were found on Wednesday are especially risky to travel in, trucking experts say.
If the refrigeration is on, temperatures can plummet to as low as minus 15 degrees Fahrenheit. If the refrigeration is off, the air supply to the trailer is cut off and those inside risk suffocation. 
