Bulgaria Grows Uneasy as Trump Complicates Its Ties to Russia
SOFIA, Bulgaria — With one foot in the West and the other in the East, Bulgaria has long engaged in a delicate balancing act.
But now the country, and its new president, Rumen Radev, will have to learn how to balance Donald J. Trump and an increasingly energized Vladimir V. Putin.
Mr. Radev contemplated his new role as balancer in chief two days before he was sworn in on Jan. 19, sitting across the street from the presidential palace in the labyrinthine former headquarters of the Bulgarian Communist Party.
“We have a clear road map to follow,” Mr. Radev said. “Staying in the E.U. and staying in NATO. But at the same time, we have a deep historical relationship with Russia.”
Countries like Bulgaria have spent decades balancing East and West, and playing one off the other. But the prospect of President Trump’s moving closer to Mr. Putin has scrambled that strategy, as have the conflicting messages coming out of the new American administration.
Mr. Trump has seemed eager for closer Kremlin ties, even echoing Moscow’s disdain for NATO and the European Union. But last week, his new ambassador echoed the Obama administration’s harder line, saying the United States would not withdraw sanctions against Russia until the country pulled its troops out of Crimea.
At the same time, Mr. Putin has been showing new signs of swagger in his dealings with Russia’s neighbors; on Thursday he arrived in Hungary for his first foray into Europe in the Trump era.
Bulgaria is an eager member of the European Union, but as rising nationalism caused support for the union to wane, here and elsewhere, Russian influence has crept in. On the surface, this suggests that Mr. Trump’s outreach to Moscow, if genuine, would be good for Bulgaria — and, indeed, nationalists are thrilled.
But Bulgaria has also known so many betrayals and occupations that this sudden lurch has inspired as much worry as elation, including fears that Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin will forge a bargain between themselves that serves their two nations but carves up the region into spheres of influence, just as the major powers did at the end of World War II.
For many reasons, including economic necessity, a common culture and deep historical ties, Bulgarian politicians, including the president, want closer relations with Russia, but not so close that their nation loses its cherished ties to the West and falls firmly into Russia’s orbit.
It is unclear whether Bulgaria’s old balancing act will work in the emerging international order. Indeed, similar calculations are being made throughout Central and Eastern Europe as leaders wait to see what Mr. Trump has in mind.
It was the subtext of the meeting in Budapest last week between Mr. Putin and Hungary’s autocratic prime minister, Viktor Orban, at which the two expressed the desire for friendly relations but did not mention sticky issues like the Crimean sanctions.
For Bulgaria, the poorest member of the European Union and the one with the deepest ties to Russia, the ride has been a particularly turbulent one.
After the initial euphoria over the collapse of Communism and membership in the European Union in 2007 and NATO in 2004, disappointments followed. The slow pace of economic growth, persistent corruption, domineering oligarchs and a dependence on Russian oil and gas caused many politicians in Bulgaria and elsewhere to pivot eastward. A growing number of populists and nationalists found much to admire in Mr. Putin’s autocratic approach.
When Bulgaria was accepted into the European Union, the country turned westward with great zeal. Money poured in from Brussels. Hundreds of thousands of Bulgarians seized the chance to move to Britain, Germany and elsewhere. But the growing ambivalence about the union was apparent as recently as last month when the 10th anniversary of Bulgaria’s entrance into the union passed with barely any public celebration or notice.
Now pro-Western voices are on the defensive in Bulgaria, and the tenor of national politics has shifted in a more Russia-friendly way. How confusion over Mr. Trump’s actual intentions toward Moscow will affect that dynamic remains to be seen. Mr. Trump’s manner of talking has already emboldened nationalists and populists throughout Central and Eastern Europe — including Mr. Orban and Milos Zeman, the Czech Republic’s president — to sharpen their own talk and offer the Kremlin an even friendlier hand, even as many analysts warn against creeping influence from Russia.
“The more you go to the East, the more you see more authoritarian systems and more corrupt practices,” said Ognyan Minchev, executive director of the Institute for Regional and International Studies and a professor of political science at the University of Sofia. “
