Russian Official Seeks to Ban ‘Beauty and the Beast’ Over Gay Character
MOSCOW — A Russian lawmaker who was the driving force behind a measure that banned the distribution of “homosexual propaganda” to minors said on Monday that the law should be applied to a new Disney version of “Beauty and the Beast,” even while acknowledging that he had not yet seen the movie.
The lawmaker, Vitaly V. Milonov, relied on news media reports and complaints from parents that the children’s film includes a gay character who participates in a “sexually deviated scene,” said his spokesman, Ilya Yevstigneyev. This is an apparent reference not to the concept of love between a human and a beast but to a seconds-long glimpse of a gay character near the end of the movie dancing with the object of his affections.
“In this case, society cannot be silent about what film distributors are offering under the guise of a children’s tale,” Mr. Milonov said in a letter to the Russian Culture Ministry, which oversees the film market. “The obvious, blatant, shameless propaganda of sin, of perverted sexual relations.”
The release of the film coincides with the start of spring vacation for Russian schoolchildren, adding — for Mr. Milonov — a sense of urgency. “Our common task,” he writes, “is to stop this music film from being shown on screens one way or another.”
There is no disputing that the movie, starring the British actress Emma Watson as Belle, features a gay character, LeFou, played by an American, Josh Gad. Bill Condon, the director, said as much in an interview with a British magazine, noting as a point of pride that it would be the first Disney movie to do so. Last week, a drive-in theater in rural Alabama cited similar arguments in declaring that it, too, would refuse to screen the movie.
The Russian Culture Ministry did not respond to a request for comment, and Disney did not respond to a query.
Fighting homosexuality has been a recurrent theme for Mr. Milonov, 43, a champion of the Russian Orthodox Church. In 2013, he lobbied successfully for the “homosexual propaganda” law banning the distribution to minors of materials depicting “nontraditional sexual relations.”
He and some associates also raided gay clubs in St. Petersburg to evict underage customers and once demanded the prosecution of the pop stars Madonna and Lady Gaga for spreading what he considered “homosexual propaganda.”
