Back in My Day ...
Australia Diary collects reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. We’d love to see your story too. Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com and click here for more information.
To the young lady who ran into the wall of a construction site at University of New South Wales this week because she was looking at her smartphone instead of the direction she was traveling: Are you O.K.? 
You fell down. Your phone hit the pavement with the unmistakable clack of cheap plastic against asphalt. And then the rest of you followed. 
I was shocked. Maybe not as much as you. Because you did something odd. You just picked up your phone, got up, ran around the wall and continued on. As though nothing had happened. 
I yelled, “Are you O.K.?” but you didn’t glance backward. You just kept running. 
I read it as a testament to the fear of social embarrassment over concern for your own welfare. That I can understand. But are you O.K.? 
I think that because it was a temporary wooden wall, it would have yielded a little. It could have been a lot worse. You got lucky. 
I was on my way to a talk by Rutger Bregman, an author who was visiting the university and who offers an optimistic view of the future. I had hoped maybe you were on your way there, too, but you weren’t. 
The audience was mostly baby boomers. 
I would guess you are student in your 20s and have little interest in such talks, which is ironic as the future he talks of belongs more to you than them. I think you would have appreciated it, though. 
One of the points he made is that most people are actually pretty nice. People care about strangers and want to help when they can. So if you run into a wall, most people’s immediate reaction will not be, “Oh, that was funny,” but “Are you O.K.?” 
I hope you are.
Recently my friend and I were having dinner in a restaurant in the cold and windy city of Canberra. We were totally absorbed in eating spicy Malaysian food and talking nonstop about our favorite subjects: movies, music and United States politics. We are old friends so our conversation was well advanced before we even got to our table. 
It was early evening, and the restaurant was full. Sitting at the table next to us was a young couple; I only glanced at them as they sat down and didn’t notice when they left the restaurant. 
When my friend and I finished our meal and went to the cash register to pay, the manager said, “Your meal is already paid for.” 
What did that mean? We looked at him in puzzlement, and he explained. 
“The young couple next to you paid for your meal,” he said, “because they told me they had never seen old people talk so animatedly and so intensely before and they wanted to acknowledge it.” 
Surreal.
Riding the tram today was no different from any other school day. Even when you think it’s at full capacity, there will always be another person forcing themselves in, squashing everyone on board. If you manage to nab a seat on a uni tram at this hour, it’s your lucky day. 
I watched as an older gentleman entered the tram. As he looked around at the crowd, he pulled a disgruntled look that read, “bloody students.” 
Nobody paid any attention to him. They were all stuck in their own world either chatting happily away with their tram companions or, if alone, oblivious to anything outside their smartphone bubble. No one offered him a seat, and he was forced to be part of the standing crowd in the middle of the tram. 
As the tram pulled up to its next stop, a lady began to leave her seat. Spotting this, the older gentleman hurried to the vacant seat only to bump into another gentleman coming from the other direction. 
There was an awkward pause and a stare. 
The second gentleman gave in, letting the first sit down. When thanking him for the gesture, the first gentleman said with a grin, “I guess I'm older then! How old are you?” 
The second gentleman responded, “I'm 70.” 
“Well, I'm 72.” 
And they chuckled like young schoolboys over their age difference.
