RIO DE JANEIRO — Brazil’s meat industry has taken “a punch in the stomach,” with exports plummeting in the wake of a corruption scandal over safety standards, the country’s agriculture minister said on Wednesday.
“We got a very big shock, a blow that this sector did not deserve,” the minister, Blairo Maggi, told the Brazilian Senate.
Last Friday, after a two-year investigation called ‘Weak Flesh,’ the Federal Police carried out raids and arrested dozens of federal inspectors, saying they had accepted bribes to ignore the adulteration or expiration of processed foods and falsified sanitary permits. Two of Brazil’s food-processing giants, JBS and BRF, were named, along with smaller companies. JBS and BRF have denied the allegations, as have some of the other companies.
Government figures showed the bottom dropping out of sales after the arrests. Brazilian meat export sales on March 21 fell to just $74,000, compared with a daily average for March of $63 million, commerce officials said.
South Africa and Egypt banned imports from Brazilian meatpacking companies named in the scandal, the G1 news site reported, joining at least six other nations — including China, Japan and Mexico — and the European Union in announcing restrictions.
Agriculture makes up almost a quarter of the economy, and the country was already reeling from a crippling recession; huge corruption scandals that have tainted many politicians, including ministers in President Michel Temer’s unpopular government; and the impeachment of his predecessor, Dilma Rousseff. Mr. Temer’s administration had been trying to convince foreign investors that Brazil is serious about restoring its beleaguered economy, with austerity measures and proposals to make sweeping changes to the pension system.
“This is clearly a setback in the government’s effort to turn Brazil around,” said Oliver Stuenkel, a professor of international relations at the Getulio Vargas Foundation in São Paulo. “It just contributes to a general notion that things are a bit out of control, that Brazil is rudderless.”
But in recent days there has been a backlash over the investigation as the government has cited what it calls mistakes and misunderstandings in the inquiry.
On Sunday, Mr. Maggi said investigators had misunderstood one wiretap to mean cardboard was being put into meat when it referred to packaging. Another allegation, that pigs’ heads were used in sausage, was actually legal in some products, Mr. Maggi said.
That day, Mr. Temer took ambassadors of meat-importing countries to a steakhouse in the capital, Brasília. The Brazilian news media later reported that much of the meat sold there was imported.
In a statement to the World Trade Organization on Wednesday, the government said, “The standards of excellence of our products are among the best in the world.” Of 2,300 inspectors, just 33 are being investigated, and of nearly 5,000 meatpacking plants, only 21 are under suspicion, the statement said. Exports from all of those plants have been suspended.
Paulo Baía, a professor of political science at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, said the government was beginning to get on top of a “serious crisis.”
“Things have only become clear in the last two days,” he said. “In the beginning it was little information and a lot of confusion.”
Many of Brazil’s inveterate meat eaters do not seem too disturbed, at least not yet.
“I keep on buying and eating meat,” said Christian Maionchi, 47, who runs a services agency for tourists in São Paulo. “Two months from now, nobody will remember.”
