‘Fire and Fury’ From Canada  It’s Not About Trump. Or Michael Wolff.
OTTAWA — Like many book buyers, Randall Hansen, a professor of political science at the University of Toronto, has been unable to find a copy of “Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House,” Michael Wolff’s instant best seller.
His own book, though, a scholarly study about the Allies’ bombing of Germany during World War II, is readily available. It has even found a second life on three Amazon best-seller lists and is back-ordered on the site. Maybe that’s because its title is “Fire and Fury: The Allied Bombing of Germany, 1942-1945.”
“I don’t know how much of this is a mistake and how much of this is from new interest created by free advertising,” Professor Hansen said in an interview. “There might be some returns.”
The professor’s book, published 10 years ago, sold relatively well and received a nomination for one of Canada’s top book awards. It is highly critical of the British-led nighttime firebombing of German cities, finding it both morally dubious and of little strategic value. But precision daylight bombing by the United States late in the war, Professor Hansen said, did undermine Germany’s military.
Mr. Wolff’s book is also highly critical in its own way, suggesting that President Trump is unfit for office. It was rushed into release after Mr. Trump threatened to block its publication through legal action.
It will take some time to determine how many copies of the Canadian “Fire and Fury” have been sold since last week. But Professor Hansen said he found it appropriate and satisfying that his book about the cost and futility of war has gained attention, accidentally or otherwise, because of the current administration in Washington.
Professor Hansen, who is the interim director of the Munk School of Global Affairs, said that because Mr. Trump “is threatening war constantly,” it will be useful to have “a few people read about the horror of war.”
Mr. Wolff’s title echoes a threat Mr. Trump made in a United Nations General Assembly speech last August in which he vowed that North Korea would be “met with fire and fury like the world has never seen” if it endangered the United States.
The professor explained how he came up with his title.
“I struggled with different titles to get across two ideas,” he said. The “Fire” part came from the incendiary bombs used by the Royal Air Force. “Fury” refers to Air Chief Marshal Arthur Harris, who led Britain’s bomber command. Known as Bomber, Chief Marshal Harris was, in Professor Hansen’s view, obsessed with saturation bombing of German cities.
But given the attention surrounding Mr. Wolff’s book, the professor added, “it could have been called ‘The Sun Rises Tomorrow’ and have been a best seller.”
Once he finds Mr. Wolff’s book, Professor Hansen said, he intends to read it.
