India Launches Chandrayaan-2 Moon Mission on Second Try
SATISH DHAWAN SPACE CENTER, India — India is on its way to the moon.
One week after a first attempt was canceled at the last minute, the Chandrayaan-2 mission blasted off at 2:43 p.m. Monday from the Satish Dhawan Space Center on India’s southeast coast, carrying an uncrewed lunar lander and the dreams of a nation.
The 142-foot, 700-ton rocket rose on a funnel of fire, ripping through the air perfectly straight and surprisingly fast before vanishing into a thick bank of clouds.
A roaring thunder echoed across the sky.
“The mission has been successfully accomplished!” blared a message from loudspeakers at mission control.
If the rest of the mission goes as well, India will become the fourth nation — after the United States, Russia and China — to land on the moon, more than 200,000 miles away. Its target is a region near the mysterious south pole, where no other missions have explored.
[How to follow the Chandrayaan-2 moon landing.]
This would be a huge leap forward for India’s ambitious space program, and scientists and defense experts everywhere are watching to see whether the country can pull it off.
So are countless Indians. There are few things as unifying for a nation as a successful space program, and, over the past few weeks, Chandrayaan-2 posters have popped up everywhere and schoolchildren have been hunched over mini-Chandrayaans made from empty plastic bottles, learning the physics of rocketry.
The timing could not be better. This weekend was the 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing, and the anniversary coverage has fanned lunar fever around the world.
Indian officials insist that the timing was a coincidence — they had wanted to launch the Chandrayaan-2 mission a couple of years ago as a space joint venture with Russia. But when the Russians backed out, the Indians needed more time to build everything on their own.
On Monday, a huge crowd of space enthusiasts gathered at the gates of Satish Dhawan Space Center, which sits on an empty, bushy coastal plain.
It was hot and extremely muggy, the kind of weather in which sweat flows freely. Cameras dangled from the necks of spectators. Some people, like K. Kaushal, 8, w
