Moscow Police Arrest More Than 1,300 at Election Protest
MOSCOW — Lines of riot police officers in body armor and helmets blocked the streets of central Moscow on Saturday, arresting more than 1,300 demonstrators — chasing some of them down alleys — to blunt a protest over the fairness of coming city elections.
“We love Russia! They love money!” protesters chanted, a reference to widespread anger over government corruption. Others sat in the streets, awaiting arrest and reading copies of the Constitution.
The spark for Saturday’s protest was a decision by election authorities to bar several opposition candidates from running for Moscow’s City Council, asserting that they had falsified signatures on petitions to run — a charge the candidates denied.
An independent monitoring group said more than 1,300 people were arrested near City Hall, the intended site of the rally, although many never made it there. As in past protests, the authorities began making arrests blocks away so a large crowd could not form.
The protest, which not authorized by the government, was the latest in a series of street demonstrations staged as President Vladimir V. Putin’s approval ratings have dipped amid economic hardship.
The authorities were prepared to suppress Saturday’s rally and its leaders.
Aleksei A. Navalny, the opposition leader who had called the demonstration, was arrested on Wednesday and sentenced to 30 days in jail. Other prominent opposition politicians — including Ilya V. Yashin, Dmitry G. Gudkov and Ivan Y. Zhdanov — were also rounded up before the event and released only late in the evening.
A post on the Facebook page of Mr. Yashin, a street activist and one of the politicians who was barred from running, said 10 masked police officers had removed him from his apartment in Moscow overnight before the Saturday demonstration.
“It is horrible. My feeling is that we live under an occupation,” said Nadezhda Pilinskaya, 59, referring to the heavy police presence in the city center. “They fear that the end is coming, the end of this regime.”
Ms. Pilinskaya, a retired entrepreneur, added, “We will have nobody to choose from on Election Day.”
At stake in the Sept. 8 election are the 45 seats on the Moscow City Council, which is responsible for a large municipal budget and is controlled by the pro-Kremlin United Russia party. Election officials have so far registered nearly 200 candidates, most of whom are largely supportive of Mr. Putin.
Protesters say that without opposition candidates, the coming city election is rigged. Some protesters chanted, “Where is my signature?” Others yelled, “Where is my candidate?”
The police could be seen spraying some demonstrators with a chemical irritant. One woman, Aleksandra Y. Parushina, bled from a blow to the head with a nightstick.
“None of us was breaking the law. This situation was provoked by the police,” said Ms. Parushina, her head wrapped in a blood-soaked bandage. “I even lost consciousness for a minute,” she said while awaiting an ambulance.
Even before the election dispute, protests had broken out in provincial cities as Russia’s economy swoons under Western sanctions. Street actions began over bread-and-butter issues such as the placement of garbage dumps and the dismal wages of medical workers, which highlight growing frustration over gloomy standards of living.
While the near-weekly demonstrations in the capital and other cities have pierced the image of unified support for Mr. Putin, the scale of support for such rallies is unclear.
The Moscow police said that 3,500 people came out for Saturday’s rally, including about 700 journalists and bloggers who had registered beforehand. The number could not be independently verified.
