Fire Tears Through Senegal Religious Festival, Killing at Least 22
DAKAR, Senegal — A fire that erupted during a religious festival in rural Senegal attended by thousands of people has killed at least 22 worshipers and injured more than 100, government officials said.
Several people were still missing on Thursday, said Seydou Guèye, a government spokesman. The fire, which broke out Wednesday night during the fifth day of the nine-day festival, also destroyed buildings and killed cattle, sheep and other animals. The cause has not been determined.
The annual event, an Islamic spiritual retreat known as the Daaka festival, takes place in the village of Médina Gounas in the eastern part of the country. It is one of the biggest religious gatherings in Senegal, a majority Muslim country.
The government had warned religious leaders in the area about potential fire hazards at the festival, which is held in an autonomous part of the country that is not governed by Senegalese law.
Local news media broadcast a video showing people helping firefighters trying to douse the flames, with some of them carrying water in bowls to dump on the blaze.
“I have never seen a fire of such violence,” Mady Kassé, who was in Médina Gounas, told L’Observateur, a local newspaper. “Things were so fast that it was impossible to think properly.”
Assane Hamady Ba, 62, came to the festival from Mauritania. He suffered burns and said he watched the fire kill some of his friends. “I have a hard time exploring what happened,” he told the newspaper.
Fires have broken out before during the festival. In 2010, six people were killed and several injured by a fire. The government suggested fireproofing several buildings at the center where the festival is held. But Médina Gounas, which as an autonomous community is ruled by Islamic law, rejected the suggestion. It said any changes to the structures on the festival grounds would destroy their spiritual significance.
President Macky Sall of Senegal called the fire a tragedy. “We must take the necessary measures to avoid these accidents, which are very unfortunate,” he said during a news conference.
The president, who planned to tour the site Friday, called on the spiritual leaders in Médina Gounas to consider the fireproofing plan the government had proposed in 2012.
Médina Gounas is much more conservative than most of the country, which practices a more liberal Islam, especially in Dakar, the capital, where nightclubs pulse on the weekends, some of them selling alcohol, and hip-hop music is popular. But in Médina Gounas, women are required to be veiled in public, and alcohol, tobacco and secular entertainment are forbidden. Women are also excluded from the annual spiritual retreat, where men assemble for nine days and nights of prayers and other rituals.
The festival brings together thousands of people from across Senegal, as well as from neighboring countries. Many Senegalese living abroad return home for prayers at Daaka.
The festival is typically held at the beginning of the rainy season, a period when winds pick up, making it easy for a fire to spread quickly.
Witnesses said hospitals in Médina Gounas, which struggled to care for the injured, lacked supplies to treat burns. Many victims were transported to a hospital in Tambacounda, a larger city not far away.
“The whole hospital has been occupied with victims from the incident,” Dr. Abib Ndiaye, the chief medical officer in Tambacounda, told a local radio station. “It is a very difficult situation.”
