British Student Is Fatally Stabbed on Train in Jerusalem
JERUSALEM — A British student in her early 20s was stabbed to death on Friday on a Jerusalem commuter train during a busy week of religious observances in the city.
The attacker was identified by officials as a 57-year-old Palestinian man with a history of mental illness.
The attack took place after noon as the train passed near the Old City, packed with Christians observing Good Friday, Jews observing Passover and Muslims in weekly Friday Prayer at Al Aqsa Mosque, the police said.
The man pulled a knife from his bag and stabbed the student several times in the chest, the police said. She was pronounced dead soon after she arrived at Hadassah Medical Center.
An off-duty police officer in the same car pulled the emergency brake, disarmed the attacker and, with the help of another passenger, subdued the assailant, the Israeli police said.
Hebrew University identified the student as Hannah Bladon, part of an exchange from the University of Birmingham. The university said she was part of a semester-long program that began in January.
Though numbers vary, nearly 40 Israelis have been killed in a wave of attacks by Palestinians, largely stabbings and ramming by vehicles, since 2015. Palestinian officials have reported more than 250 Palestinians killed during the same period — most, according to Israel, while carrying out attacks or trying to.
Ms. Bladon appears to be the third visitor killed in that period. The other two were American.
Israeli officials identified the assailant as Gamil Tamimi of East Jerusalem. They said he had recently been released from a psychiatric hospital, where he had tried to commit suicide by swallowing a razor blade. They said he was convicted in 2011 of sexually assaulting his daughter.
Two other people were slightly wounded in the train episode, including a pregnant woman hurt when the train stopped abruptly, medical officials said.
Tourists interviewed at the Old City expressed sadness but said they visited Jerusalem — on high alert during the holidays, with an expanded police presence — understanding the risks of the continuing conflict, now at a relatively low level.
“You came to a place knowing there is terrorism,” said Jos Vranken, 34, a religion teacher from Belgium. “But you don’t feel unsafe.”
