Strong Quake Strikes Southern Philippines, Killing at Least 6
MANILA — At least six people were killed and more than 100 others were injured when an earthquake struck the southern Philippines late Friday, a disaster management official said on Saturday.
The earthquake, which the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology measured as a magnitude 6.7, hit northeast of the city of Surigao in the Mindanao region.
Renato Solidum, the institute’s director, said that the quake occurred at a depth of 11 kilometers, or about 6.8 miles, and that as many as 30 aftershocks followed over the next 10 hours.
An official with the Provincial Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office, Ramon Gotinga, said on Saturday that at least six people had been killed as a result of the quake and that 90 others had been hospitalized, saying that those numbers might rise.
Mr. Gotinga retracted an earlier report in which he said that 15 people had been killed, citing confusion in the disaster zone and mistakes in counting victims.
Surigao, about 430 miles southeast of Manila, was plunged into darkness when the quake knocked out power. Some homes were destroyed, the police and emergency relief services there said. The military said a bridge connecting two towns had collapsed.
Nearly 100 aftershocks have been felt, according to residents. Evacuation centers accommodated wary residents overnight, but many returned home Saturday, said Judy Taguiwalo, the welfare secretary, according to The Associated Press.
The local disaster management office said the quake had damaged the runway at the local airport and forced the cancellation of all flights. A ferry terminal was inaccessible after a bridge leading to the area also collapsed, the military said.
Televised news reports showed soldiers and other emergency workers pulling the body of a man from the concrete rubble of a damaged house.
In Surigao’s downtown area, the facades of a number of buildings were heavily cracked, their glass windows shattered with canopies and debris falling on parked cars on the street below, The A.P. reported.
Superintendent Anthony Maghari, the local police chief, said the quake also damaged a school building and parked vehicles. Multiple aftershocks were keeping people on edge, he added.
One resident in the area, Carlos Conseco, told the radio station DZMM in Manila that he woke up when his bed began to shake violently.
“The cemented streets outside cracked about two feet,” Mr. Conseco told the radio station by phone from the town of Mainit, just south of Surigao. “There was electricity last night, but it was cut off later. We have no power since early today. We are on a blackout.”
There was no threat of a tsunami from the quake, the seismology institute said, adding that the quake was set off by the movement along the Philippine fault zone.
More than a thousand people flocked to the grounds of the provincial capital building in Surigao, where they spent the night. By morning, emergency crews were in the area, distributing food and other relief supplies.
In 2013, an earthquake that measured a magnitude 7.2 struck the central provinces of Bohol and Cebu, killing more than 220 people and injuring about 700 others.
