Trump to Suspend Military Exercises on Korean Peninsula
President Trump said Tuesday that he was suspending military exercises on the Korean Peninsula and that he expected the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, to move “very quickly” to dismantle his nuclear arsenal after a day of discussions in Singapore.
But Mr. Trump said economic sanctions against North Korea would remain in place.
The summit meeting was the first of its kind between a sitting American president and a leader of North Korea, and it ended in a joint statement that opened the door to ending seven decades of hostility between the two countries.
Mr. Trump said at a news conference that the United States would stop “the war games,” in what appeared to be a concession to the North. Mr. Trump said the exercises were expensive and “very provocative.”
In their joint statement, the United States “committed to provide security guarantees.” In exchange, Mr. Kim “reaffirmed his firm and unwavering commitment to complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”
Here’s what happened:
• The two leaders first met privately for less than an hour in a one-on-one session with interpreters present, before breaking off for a larger meeting and then a working lunch with aides.
• The leaders signed their joint statement, in which the United States committed to providing guarantees of security to North Korea in exchange for denuclearization.
• “We had a historic meeting and decided to leave the past behind,” Mr. Kim said as he and Mr. Trump signed the joint statement, adding, “The world will see a major change.”
Mr. Trump was similarly optimistic about the progress they achieved, saying, “We are going to take care of a very big and very dangerous problem for the world.”
• Here are photos from Singapore.
In the joint statement, Mr. Trump “committed to provide security guarantees” to North Korea. Mr. Kim “reaffirmed his firm and unwavering commitment to complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”
But the statement was short on details and did not lay out potential next steps or a timetable. The joint statement was not immediately released to reporters, but it was legible in a photo of Mr. Trump holding it up at the ceremony.
The statement said the two nations would hold “follow-on negotiations” led by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and a high-level North Korean official “at the earliest possible date, to implement the outcomes” of the summit meeting.
The statement also said the two nations would “join their efforts to build a lasting and stable peace regime” on the divided Korean Peninsula, meaning talks to reduce military tensions that could eventually lead to a formal peace treaty to end the Korean War.
At the end of their meeting, Mr. Kim pledged to destroy a missile-engine testing site, Mr. Trump told reporters, in what he characterized as a last-minute decision that was not included in the joint agreement.
“I got that after we signed the agreement,” Mr. Trump said of the concession. “I said, ‘Do me a favor; we’ve got this missile-engine testing site. We know where it is because of the heat.’ It’s incredible the equipment we have, to be honest with you.”
The death of Otto Warmbier, an American college student who was detained in North Korea, helped precipitate the meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim, the president said Tuesday at a post-summit meeting news conference.
“I think without Otto this would not have happened,” Mr. Trump said. “Otto was someone who did not die in vain.”
Mr. Warmbier, a student at the University of Virginia, was arrested in North Korea in 2016. He was repatriated to the United States in a coma after 17 months in detention and then died.
“The United States once again condemns the brutality of the North Korean regime as we mourn its latest victim,” Mr. Trump said in a statement at the time of Mr. Warmbier’s death.
Mr. Trump, who was a developer before he became president, focused on one particular economic prospect for North Korea: real estate.
“As an example, they have great beaches,” he said during a news conference after his meeting with Mr. Kim. “You see that whenever they’re exploding their cannons into the ocean. I said, ‘Boy, look at that view. Wouldn’t that make a great condo?’”
“You could have the best hotels in the world right there,” Mr. Trump continued. “Think of it from a real estate perspective. You have South Korea, you have China and they own the land in the middle. How bad is that, right? It’s great.”
For Americans who never got to bury loved ones killed in the Korean War, the summit meeting offered new hope.
The joint statement signed by both leaders said their two countries were committed to recovering and repatriating the remains of soldiers who were designated captured or missing at the end of the conflict in 1953.
Of the 82,000 American service members still missing from the wars of the past century, 7,702 are from the Korean War, according to the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency, which is responsible for recovering missing personnel from around the world.
An estimated 120,000 South Korean troops and police officers are also unaccounted for in the Korean War.
Mr. Trump, in his post-meeting news conference, said he had received “countless calls and letters” from family members asking him to discuss the issue with Mr. Kim, and that Mr. Kim had agreed to the request “so quickly.”
“The remains will be coming back,” Mr. Trump said. “They’re going to start that process immediately.”
Mr. Trump presented Mr. Kim with a short video depicting the prosperity that could come with peace. The video, which was shown to journalists before Mr. Trump’s news conference, was a hyperbolic movie-trailer-style montage of many, many images, both positive and dire.
Among them: airplanes, bridges, skyscrapers, smiling children, American armaments, missile launches, postwar devastation, high-speed trains, a basketball player dunking a ball and horses running through water.
“There comes a time when only a few are called upon to make a difference, but the question is: What difference will the few make?” intones a narrator in the English-language version of the video.
“The past doesn’t have to be the future. Out of the darkness can come the light.”
President Moon Jae-in of South Korea celebrated the meeting’s outcome, calling it “a historic event that has helped break down the last remaining Cold War legacy on earth.”
“I pay my high compliments for the courage and determination of the two leaders, President Trump and Chairman Kim, not to settle for that outdated and familiar reality but to take a daring step towards change,” Mr. Moon said.
“Once again, I would like to pay my respects to President Trump, who achieved a feat that no one else has ever delivered,” he said.
But Mr. Trump’s statement that he was suspending joint military exercises with South Korea stunned many South Koreans. The annual exercises have been an integral part of the alliance with the United States that forms the bulwark of South Korea’s defenses against the North.
Mr. Trump’s pronouncement raised fears that Washington was making concessions before North Korea had actually dismantled its nuclear weapons.
The South Korean Defense Ministry issued a curt statement saying that it was trying to determine Mr. Trump’s intentions.
China welcomed the news from Singapore and patted itself on the back.
“I think nobody can doubt the extremely unique and important role China has played,” said Wang Yi, the foreign minister.
Mr. Wang may have been so pleased because of Mr. Trump’s decision to suspend military exercises on the Korean Penninsula.
China floated that idea last year, suggesting the North suspend its weapons program in exchange for an end to American military exercises.
Chinese experts on North Korea, however, were underwhelmed by the summit meeting’s outcome.
“Well below my expectation,” Cheng Xiaohe of Renmin University said of the joint statement. “Full of empty talk that has already been said before. So far Trump has failed to prove himself a dealmaker.”
Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim filed into a working lunch with their expanded entourages, and hamburgers were not on the menu.
Mr. Trump, you may remember, famously said early in his campaign that he was willing to sit down with Mr. Kim and perhaps have a hamburger with him.
Instead, their first meal together at the Capella Hotel on Sentosa Island in Singapore included beef short rib confit, Korean stuffed cucumber and sweet and sour crispy pork with Yangzhou fried rice. According to the menu released by the White House, dessert included a dark chocolate tartlet ganache — perhaps in honor of Mr. Trump’s preference for chocolate cake. The White House did not indicate whether it had been flown over from Mar-a-Lago. When Mr. Trump hosted President Xi Jinping of China, he boasted about serving “the most beautiful piece of chocolate cake that you’ve ever seen.”
In deference to Mr. Kim, there was also another Korean dish, Daegu jorim, described as soy braised cod fish with radish and Asian vegetables.
Mr. Trump’s team at the summit meeting included, among others, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo; John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff; John R. Bolton, the national security adviser; and Matthew Pottinger, the National Security Council’s top Asia hand.
The administration also recruited Sung Y. Kim, a seasoned North Korea negotiator currently serving as the American ambassador to the Philippines.
Among the North Koreans attending the summit meeting is Kim Yong-chol, a former leader of North Korea’s main spy agency, who now serves as a vice chairman of the ruling Workers’ Party. He had visited Mr. Trump at the White House on June 1, delivering a personal letter from Mr. Kim.
Ri Yong-ho, North Korea’s foreign minister, and Choe Son-hui, a vice foreign minister, have haggled with the United States for decades over their country’s nuclear weapons program. Ms. Choe called Vice President Mike Pence “ignorant and stupid” last month, briefly jeopardizing the summit meeting.
Also on the trip are No Kwang-chol and Kim Yo-jong. Mr. No became minister of the People’s Armed Forces during a recent reshuffle of the top military leadership.
Ms. Kim, Mr. Kim’s only sister, has been an important face of North Korea’s recent diplomatic overtures. Mr. Kim sent her to South Korea in February to invite President Moon Jae-in to a summit meeting. She is in charge of the party’s Department of Propaganda and Agitation, one of the most powerful agencies in North Korea.
