BOGOTÁ, Colombia — Vice President Mike Pence announced additional sanctions on Venezuelan officials Monday, urged Latin American neighbors to freeze assets of the state oil company and held his first face-to-face meeting with Venezuela’s opposition leader.
Visiting Colombia, Mr. Pence also warned some countries in the region that have conspicuously sought to remain neutral in the crisis convulsing Venezuela that they cannot remain so, singling out Mexico and Uruguay.
“We believe there can be no bystanders,” he said. “No one on the sidelines of this, particularly in our hemisphere.”
The statements by Mr. Pence, who was making his fifth trip to Latin America, escalated the Trump administration’s campaign aimed at pressuring President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela to step down.
Mr. Pence flew to Colombia two days after an American-backed effort to send convoys of humanitarian aid into Venezuela and persuade its soldiers to defect degenerated into clashes and mayhem between anti-Maduro protesters and Venezuelan security forces along the borders with Colombia and Brazil.
Only a smattering of aid got through, and it did little if anything to loosen Mr. Maduro’s control in Venezuela, a once prosperous nation that is now reeling from hyperinflation and poverty.
The failure amounted to a setback for the Venezuelan opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, who declared himself president last month and has been recognized as Venezuela’s legitimate leader by the United States and roughly 50 other countries.
Mr. Guaidó violated a travel ban imposed by Mr. Maduro’s government to help direct the aid effort from Colombia, and in some ways staked his credibility on a successful outcome. When or even whether he will be able to return to Venezuela is unclear.
Mr. Maduro has called Mr. Guaidó a coup plotter and a Trump administration lackey, and has described the humanitarian aid effort as a pretext for an American invasion directed from Colombia. He broke relations with Colombia on Saturday in retaliation.
Venezuela’s foreign minister, Jorge Arreaza, who has spent much of the past month lobbying on behalf of Mr. Maduro’s government at the United Nations in New York, said Monday that the outcome of the weekend’s confrontations in Venezuela showed that opposition leaders had failed and “the momentum of the coup is over.”
“It didn’t happen and it’s not going to happen,” Mr. Arreaza said in an interview at the Venezuelan Mission. “Of course, they didn’t fulfill their objectives.”
As Mr. Guaidó met with Mr. Pence in person for the first time, Mr. Pence said that the weekend confrontations had only “steeled the resolve of the United States” to become more involved with increased sanctions as well as larger amounts of aid.
“We are with you 100 percent,” Mr. Pence said.
The new sanctions, targeting assets of four Venezuelan governors allied with Mr. Maduro, come atop crippling American sanctions issued late last month against the state oil company, known as PDVSA, a crucial source of revenue for the Maduro government.
The United States Treasury Department, which enforces American sanctions, said the governors had been “involved in endemic corruption and in blocking the delivery of critical humanitarian aid.”
On Monday, Mr. Pence also announced an additional $56 million in aid to the Venezuelan opposition, and he urged Latin American nations to transfer the control of assets from Mr. Maduro to Mr. Guaidó.
While the new round of sanctions amounted to a relatively modest increase, Mr. Pence warned that more punishing measures loom from the Treasury Department in coming days.
With Mr. Guaidó’s call for mass defections by the Venezuelan military largely unheeded, some opposition figures have begun talking of outside military intervention as a possible next step.
In remarks to Mr. Pence and an assembled group of regional officials on Monday, Mr. Guaidó said that he remained resolute in the face of a setback and called on allies to create a “more powerful and effective” stranglehold on Mr. Maduro’s government.
“Democracy must prevail,” Mr. Guaido said. “Peace must prevail. Millions of Venezuelans are asking for humanitarian aid.”
In their discussions, Mr. Pence said, Mr. Guaidó had reiterated a request for military support — a possibility that President Trump has called “an option” — but on Monday the vice president did not make any commitments. Instead, Mr. Pence told reporters that he had assured the opposition leader that “all options” remain, but that “we hope for a peaceful transition.”
In recent days, Mr. Pence and several other senior administration officials, including John R. Bolton, the national security adviser, issued multiple calls for Mr. Maduro to allow in food and medicine and threatened action if he did not relent.
American officials have cheered reports of Venezuelan troop defections and castigated Mr. Maduro’s forces as hoodlums and thugs.
“To other officials that are living in fear of Maduro, make the right choice and side with your fellow citizens,” Mr. Bolton said, reaching out to potential defectors on Twitter.
How many troops have defected remains unclear.
Iván Duque, the Colombian president, said Monday that 440 had crossed into Colombia. Venezuela’s foreign minister, Mr. Arreaza, said such figures are vastly inflated.
“As far as I know, it’s 20, 22, something like that,” Mr. Arreaza said. Mr. Maduro’s adversaries, he said, are “going to maximize everything about Venezuela and, you know, it’s dangerous.”
The Trump administration has taken a particularly hawkish stance on Venezuela, which Mr. Trump has in recent weeks framed as an ideological adversary of the United States and a promoter of a brand of socialism that must be defeated.
The president has steadily ramped up his rhetoric.
Last fall, Mr. Trump praised Venezuelans, who have been leaving their country in large numbers because of the political turmoil and dire economic situation, as “great, great people,” some of whom he said he had gotten to know during visits to his golf club in South Florida.
He was more forceful in a speech to the Venezuelan community in Florida last week, when he declared that the “twilight hour” of socialism would soon be over.
The situation in Venezuela has also become a matter of partisan debate inside the United States.
Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, has been a vocal supporter of the effort to oust Mr. Maduro, and he drew criticism on Sunday when he appeared to compare the Venezuelan president to Muammar el-Qaddafi, the deposed Libyan ruler who was dragged through the streets and killed during a violent Arab Spring uprising.
Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democratic of Connecticut, accused the administration of using the delivery of humanitarian aid as a tool to bring about “regime change.”
“Venezuela didn’t just lurch into humanitarian crisis,” Mr. Murphy wrote on Twitter. “The aid is being sent there now as part of a regime change strategy. Many are hoping that it will be the match that lights a civil war against Maduro.”
On Monday, Mr. Pence sought instead to make an emotional case for humanitarian aid as he and Mr. Guaidó met with dozens of Venezuelans who were living in exile. As cameras rolled, the vice president approached and embraced a tearful man who had been speaking in Spanish.
“We are with you,” Mr. Pence said in English, patting his hand.
