Swiss Denied Roman Abramovich Residency Over Suspected Criminality
MOSCOW — Already spurned by Britain, the Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich has suffered another blow in his search for residency in Western Europe, this time with a court ruling in Switzerland.
The decision, handed down on Monday by a federal court in Lausanne, lifted a ban on the publication of a Swiss police report declaring him a threat to security. It ended a seven-month legal battle by Abramovich, a Russian billionaire, to prevent news media outlets from publishing confidential police information that led the Swiss authorities to reject his application for residency near a ski resort.
Like many Russian billionaires, Mr. Abramovich has long sought a secure shelter for himself and his money outside his home country, even though he has had no public quarrels with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
For years he had an investor visa to Britain, where he owns a string of properties and the Chelsea soccer club, but he ran into trouble renewing the visa this year.
Switzerland refused him residency in June of last year. But the reasons for the decision were not known until Tuesday, when newspapers owned by the Swiss media group Tamedia published extracts for the first time from a 2017 letter from Swiss federal police officers to migration authorities. The media group obtained the letter early this year, but a court order secured by Mr. Abramovich in February prevented it from making the letter public.
Tamedia, which owns a string of major newspapers in Switzerland’s French- and German-speaking regions, on Tuesday welcomed the lifting of the ban as a victory for press freedom and said it would enable people to understand why Mr. Abramovich’s request for residency had failed.
The allegations against Mr. Abramovich were not substantiated by evidence. But the police letter recommended that he not be allowed to settle in the Alpine village of Verbier because of suspicions of “money laundering and presumed contact with criminal organizations.”
It also alleged, according to extracts published Tuesday, that there was reason to believe that the assets of Mr. Abramovich — who made his initial fortune in Russia’s oil business in the 1990s — “are at least partially of illegal origin.”
In a statement denouncing what he called “defamatory allegations,” Mr. Abramovich’s Swiss lawyer, Daniel Glasl, said: “Any suggestion that Mr. Abramovich has been involved in money laundering or has contacts with criminal organizations is entirely false. Mr. Abramovich has never been charged with participating in money laundering and does not have a criminal record.”
Furious over lengthy delays in renewing his British investor visa, Mr. Abramovich withdrew his application and in May obtained Israeli citizenship under the law of return, which guarantees residency to any Jew who wants to move there.
But he has shown little desire to live in Israel full time.
The Swiss allegations could complicate efforts by Mr. Abramovich, who resides mostly in Russia, to find a secure haven elsewhere in Europe. Switzerland has a reputation for welcoming wealthy foreigners, regardless of the source of their wealth, and its refusal to take in Mr. Abramovich contrasts with the welcome extended to many other billionaires.
His lawyer, Mr. Glasl, said in his statement that the Swiss federal police had “failed to provide any evidence of criminality” and questioned why Mr. Abramovich had been singled out.
The Swiss move, however, reflects a growing wariness in many European countries of Russian money and its oligarchs, most of whom have close ties to the Kremlin, not a plus at a time of deteriorating relations between Moscow and the West.
The British government, which for years turned a blind eye to the often murky backgrounds of residents from Russia, has stepped up controls and, according to news media reports, is reviewing the residency rights of about 700 well-connected Russians who secured investor visas before 2015, when little effort was made to check on the source of the money being invested.
Mr. Abramovich’s visa troubles in Britain this year came as diplomatic tensions spiked between London and Moscow after a nerve agent attack on a retired Russian spy and his daughter in the English town of Salisbury. Britain and its allies, including the United States, expelled dozens of Russian diplomats over the poisoning.
