Philippines Promises Vietnam a Full Investigation Into Fishermen’s Deaths
MANILA — The Philippine government said on Monday that it had promised Vietnam a “fair and thorough” investigation into the deaths of two Vietnamese fishermen as they were being pursued by the Philippine Navy over the weekend.
The fishermen died from gunshot wounds on Saturday as they fled a navy patrol boat about 40 miles off the city of Bolinao in the northern province of Pangasinan, the Philippine authorities said. A police report said that the navy had fired warning shots at their vessel, and that the boats had then collided.
The Philippine foreign affairs secretary, Alan Peter Cayetano, discussed the episode hours later with his Vietnamese counterpart, Pham Binh Minh, at an informal meeting of Southeast Asian foreign ministers in New York, where they were attending the United Nations General Assembly.
“We would like to offer our sympathies over the unfortunate loss of life and give you our assurance that we will conduct a fair and thorough investigation,” Mr. Cayetano told Mr. Minh, according to a statement released Monday by the Philippine Department of Foreign Affairs.
The Philippines and Vietnam are among several nations that have territorial claims in the South China Sea, many of which overlap. But the episode Saturday did not occur in waters claimed by both countries.
The Bolinao police said in a report that the Vietnamese boat was one of six that had been spotted in the area, allegedly violating international law by fishing in the Philippines’s so-called exclusive economic zone. A navy boat with Bolinao police and coast guard personnel aboard approached, and the closest vessel turned off its light and sped away, prompting a chase, according to the report.
It said the fishing boat disregarded repeated calls to stop and “made dangerous maneuvers.” Navy personnel fired warning shots, but the boat continued to flee, at which point warning shots were fired “toward the vessel,” the report said.
The boats then collided, according to the report. The Vietnamese boat sped away but stopped after several minutes. The Philippine team boarded and found two bodies on the deck. There were six bullet holes in the boat, the report said, and the Vietnamese were later determined to have died from gunshot wounds.
An initial investigation identified the fishermen as Phan Van Liem and Le Van Peo, both 41, from Phu Yen Province in Vietnam. No contraband was found on the boat, the report said.
Five Vietnamese fishermen were arrested, the authorities said. Mr. Cayetano told Mr. Minh that they would be “accorded proper treatment” and allowed visits by Vietnamese Embassy personnel, according to the Foreign Affairs Department.
Teams from the Philippine Navy, the coast guard and the national police are investigating.
Arrests of fishermen found in another country’s waters have often fueled the tensions surrounding the complicated territorial disputes in the South China Sea. China claims most of the sea as its own, and Brunei, Malaysia and Taiwan also have claims.
Last fall, after visiting Vietnam, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines freed 17 Vietnamese fishermen who had been detained in Manila for months.
Last month, the coast guard detained 10 Vietnamese fishermen on suspicion of poaching off a remote southwestern Philippine island. They are still in custody.
