   Alleged San Diego synagogue shooter John Earnest pleaded not guilty on murder charges Tuesday and was held without bail, deemed “an obvious and extraordinary risk to public safety and to the community” by Judge Joseph P. Brannigan. 
   The 19-year-old allegedly showed up at Chabad of Poway synagogue on Saturday, the last day of Passover, clad in a tactical vest and toting a legally purchased AR-15 rifle along with five 10-pound magazines – 50 pounds of ammunition, prosecutors said in Earnest’s first court appearance. 
   Prosecutors in San Diego County Superior Court said Earnest fired eight to 10 rounds with the semiautomatic, starting in the foyer and then pointing it toward the room full of worshipers, CNN reported. 
   Lori Gilbert-Kaye, 60, was killed putting herself between the gunman and Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein. Earnest is charged with one count of murder and three counts of attempted murder in the killing of Gilbert-Kaye and the wounding of three others – the rabbi, a worshiper and an 8-year-old child. 
   After Earnest’s rapid-fire assault, the gun appeared to jam, San Diego County Deputy District Attorney Leonard Trinh said in outlining the prosecution’s case. 
   Surveillance video captured the carnage, ABC News reported. 
   The alleged shooter’s family disavowed his actions in a strongly worded statement on Monday and are not helping him with legal representation. Earnest has requested a court-appointed defender. 
   “How our son was attracted to such a darkness is a terrifying mystery to us, though we are confident that law enforcement will uncover many details of the path that he took to this evil and despicable act,” the family said. 
   Earnest could face the death penalty under a special circumstance that allows it in California for killing someone because of their religion, CNN said. 
   Earnest also faces one count of arson related to a fire at Dar-ul-Arqam Mosque in Escondido in March, The San Diego Union-Tribune reported. 
   The youth allegedly published a manifesto referencing last month’s New Zealand mosque killings as well, investigators said.   
