   A U.S. Army veteran allegedly planned to detonate a bomb at a Long Beach white nationalist rally over the weekend before he was arrested by police during an FBI sting. 
   Mark Steven Domingo, 26, was nabbed Friday after receiving what he thought was a live bomb from an undercover officer, federal officials said Monday. 
   Domingo, who served in Afghanistan between late 2012 and early 2013, decided to set off the bomb at the rally “after considering various attacks – including targeting Jews, churches, and police officers," according to a federal affidavit. 
   The rally never happened. 
   He also allegedly had considered targeting a similar rally in Huntington Beach. 
   Domingo allegedly supported ISIS and wanted “retribution” for attacks against Muslims, specifically the Christchurch massacres in New Zealand, according to court documents. 
   “America needs another Vegas event…[to] give them a taste of the terror they gladly spread all over the world,” he allegedly wrote online March 3, apparently referring to the 2017 Route 91 Harvest music festival mass shooting by gunman Stephen Paddock that killed 58 people. 
   “I feel like I should make a christians life miserable tomorrow for our fallen bros n sis in [N]ew Zealand...maybe a jews life...they shed our blood...no Muslim should have to experience this, a message needs to be sent," he allegedly wrote March 14. 
   Officials said they were in touch with an FBI informant in the same private messaging group as Domingo, as well as an “online covert employee.” Both sources told officials Domingo struggled to specify a target, but talked about white nationalists, Jews, churches and military bases. 
   “Martyrdom, bro,” he said when asked what would happen if he got caught, according to the indictment. 
   Along with the bomb, Domingo had also acquired 80 pounds of 3-inch nails to blow up for maximum damage. His possible targets included Huntington Beach, the port of Long Beach and the Santa Monica Pier, according to officials. 
   “This investigation successfully disrupted a very real threat posed by a trained combat soldier who repeatedly stated he wanted to cause the maximum number of casualties,” U.S. Attorney Nick Hanna said in a statement. “Protecting Americans from terror attacks is the number one priority of the Justice Department, and anyone who plots to use a weapon of mass destruction will be held to account.” 
   Domingo is charged with providing and attempting to provide material support to terrorists.   
