Another assault on Jews and society  With bigotry on the rise, only getting serious about guns will reduce more violence
   Last October, a hate-filled man using an AR-15, entered Pittsburgh’s Tree of Life synagogue and massacred 11 Jews on the Sabbath. 
   Saturday, precisely six months later, on the last day of Passover, another hate-filled man, carrying an assault weapon, entered the Congregation Chabad synagogue in Poway, Calif., intent on murder. That he killed only one — the heroic Lori Gilbert-Kaye, who sacrificed herself to protect her rabbi — owed to the fact that his AR-15 (yes, again) apparently jammed. 
   Not only was this another bloody attack on Jews, but the 19-year-old killer (whose name will not be mentioned here) boasted on social media of his blatant anti-Semitism. So, too, did he praise by name the murderer at the Tree of Life and the perpetrator of the New Zealand mosque killings last month. 
   The similarities are hate and rapid-fire guns. Both must be fought and curbed. 
   Virulent and violent anti-Semitism, once though as part of Europe’s dark past, is now alive here and must be combated. Yet President Trump only made it worse by insisting again the other day that there really were some “very fine people” in that deadly Nazi march in Charlottesville. 
   Changing gun laws should be easier than changing warped minds. Limit access to instruments of mass carnage. 
   It’s been 15 years since the assault weapons ban expired. The NRA claims that the ban was ineffective. But no one should believe the gun lobby, particularly now with its own ousted president Oliver North raising questions of fiscal impropriety, leading New York Attorney General Tish James to issue subpoenas. 
   In truth, the difference between incidence of mass shootings before, during and after the 1994-2004 ban can’t be ignored. Ten years before the ban: 19 gun massacres (six or more fatalities) took 155 lives. The ban years: 12 massacres and 89 lives. Ten years after the ban ended: 34 massacres and 302 lives. And it’s soared further in the subsequent five years. 
   Again, thank Providence preventing more lives being claimed in Poway. 
   Again, blame ourselves if no lessons are learned from this one. 
   And the next one. 
   And the next.   
