North Americans males born into privilege are most likely to be 'bullsh--ters,’ according to a study
   Privileged North American males are “significantly” bigger “bullshi--ters” than other English speakers, according to a report. 
   The study, called “Bullshi--ers. Who Are They and What Do We Know About Their Lives?” published by Germany’s Institute of Labor Economics (a.k.a. IZA), focused on 40,000 teenage students from nine Anglophone countries and their propensity to B.S. 
   It defined “Bullsh-t” as “a situation where an individual claims to have knowledge, experience or expertise in some matter, when really they do not. The label ‘bullshit--r’ is then assigned to someone who makes such claims on a regular basis; i.e. a person who consistently exaggerates their prowess and/or frequently tells untruths.” 
   To establish what B.S. means, the IZA’s report asked students to rate their own abilities as problem solvers and critical thinkers, then asked them to rate their level of familiarity with the following 16 mathematical terms: 
   1) Exponential function; 2) Divisor; 3) Quadratic function; 4) Proper number; 5) Linear equation; 6) Vectors; 7) Complex number; 8) Rational number; 9) Radicals; 10) Subjunctive scaling; 11) Polygon; 12) Declarative fraction; 13) Congruent figure; 14) Cosine; 15) Arithmetic mean; 16) Probability. 
   The catch is that three of those terms — Proper number, Subjunctive scaling and Declarative fraction — are not real. The more confidently respondents stated their mastery of those topics, the higher their grade as a “bullsh--ter.” 
   According to the report, North American men born into money are most likely to declare a mastery of things they know nothing about. And it’s not just Americans; Canadians are full of hot air, too. 
   “Young men are more likely to bulls--t than young women, and that bullsh--ting is somewhat more prevalent amongst those from more advantaged socioeconomic backgrounds,” the study found. "Compared to other countries, young people in North America are found to be bigger bullshi--ers than young people in England, Australia and New Zealand, while those in Ireland and Scotland are the least likely to exaggerate their mathematical knowledge and abilities." 
   Even when “Bullsh--ters” fitting that profile are wrong, they declare victory, according to the IZA report. 
   “Strong evidence also emerges that bullsh--ters also display overconfidence in their academic prowess and problem-solving skills, while also reporting higher levels of perseverance when faced with challenges and providing more socially desirable responses than more truthful groups,” the study concluded. 
   The reason for the research was to try and define the characteristics of a “bullsh--ter” in clinical terms. 
   “Although this concept is well-known in everyday life – we all probably know a bullsh--ter – very little academic research has been conducted into this issue,” the study claimed.   
