Four to Face Murder Charges in Downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17
MOSCOW — Five years after a missile shot down an airliner over a war zone in Ukraine, killing all 298 people on board, international prosecutors on Wednesday indicted three men with ties to Russian military and intelligence agencies, and implicated — but did not charge — a senior aide to President Vladimir V. Putin.
The criminal charges and the emergence of ever more detailed evidence against the Russian government, which has denied any role in downing Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, could further cool already icy relations between Moscow and the West.
[We look back at what happened to MH17 five years ago.]
At a news conference in the Netherlands, the Dutch-led investigative team announced charges against Igor Girkin, a former colonel in the F.S.B., the successor agency to the K.G.B.; and Sergey Dubinsky and Oleg Pulatov, both of whom have worked for the Russian military intelligence agency known as the G.R.U.
Prosecutors also charged Leonid Kharchenko, who is a Ukrainian citizen but led a Russian-backed separatist unit under the command of Mr. Dubinsky.
The Netherlands’ chief prosecutor, Fred Westerbeke, said the trial would begin in the Netherlands on March 9, 2020. The accused are unlikely to be present, since three are in Russia and the fourth is believed to be in a breakaway region in Ukraine, but investigators said they would seek international arrest warrants for the suspects and put out a new call for more witnesses.
The suspects “formed a chain linking the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic with the Russian Federation,” the investigators said of the four men, who were charged with the murder of 298 people. “It was through this chain the suspects were able to get heavy military equipment from Russia to the battlefield of eastern Ukraine,” including the sophisticated antiaircraft missile system that downed the plane.
The announcement was the latest development in an already meticulously documented tragedy of the Ukraine war.
The Joint Investigative Team of police from Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine — all countries directly affected by the disaster — had already shown that the missile came from a Russian military base in Kursk, in southern Russia, but had not identified suspects. The missile was identified as a Soviet-made Sa-11, or Buk, surface-to-air missile.
