Ties that Bind, and Fray
Welcome to an experiment in journalism and community — a newsletter that will help shape The New York Times’s expansion in Australia. Follow along by signing up to receive it by email, and tell us what you think at nytaustralia@nytimes.com
When The New York Times decided to expand in Australia, a rift with the United States seemed about as likely as a 25-point Super Bowl comeback. Enter Donald Trump.
You’ve probably already read about his phone call with Prime Minister Turnbull: the brevity of the exchange; President Trump’s rejection of a deal that would bring up to 1,250 refugees to the U.S. from Australia’s detention centers in Manus and Nauru.
If you want to see who those refugees really are, watch this Times video, or just look at the photo above of Behrouz Boochani, a dissident from Iran.
“Behrouz is intense when you first meet him,” said Ashley Gilbertson, the Australian photographer who shot this portrait on Manus island. “The intensity in many people wears off after first meeting — not Behrouz.”
If you want more context, read Jane Perlez, writing from Beijing about how that combative call — along with Mr. Trump’s rejection of the Trans-Pacific Partnership — threatens to push Australia closer to China. You may also enjoy this GIF capturing the call’s essence, or the message below, from a protest in Melbourne on Feb. 3.
What I found especially interesting was the response beyond the White House.
Senator John McCain, a Republican former prisoner-of-war in Vietnam, stepped in immediately, calling Australia’s ambassador to the United States, Joe Hockey, to assure him of an “unwavering support for the U.S.-Australia alliance.” Secretary of State Rex Tillerson followed up this week with another call.
Digging deeper, The Upshot, a part of The Times that uses data to drive analysis, looked at how Americans view the world, and found that for Republicans in particular, Australia was Public Ally #1.
On social media too, Americans and Australians have told me that the bonds of culture, business and travel will not be broken by politics, and if my own inbox is any kind of guide, goodwill continues to shape the U.S.-AU relationship.
Or at least it’s shaping this project. On Twitter in my introductory newsletter two weeks ag
