German synagogue attacker ‘aimed to carry out a massacre’ on Yom Kippur, prosecutor says
   A gunman accused of killing two people outside a German synagogue “aimed to carry out a massacre” on Yom Kippur, the holiest day on the Jewish calendar, prosecutors said. 
   A wooden door on the Judische Gereinde Halle Temple was the only thing that prevented suspect Stephan Balliet from carrying out his intended violence, The New York Times reported. The outside handle was removed, and the door locked from the inside on Wednesday — as it is for all services. 
   Federal Prosecutor Peter Frank told reporters the 27-year-old suspect was motivated by “scary Antisemitism, xenophobia and racism.” 
   “He armed himself with many weapons, possibly self-made, and had a large quantity of explosives,” he said, adding that Balliet was inspired by the New Zealand Mosque Massacre in March, which left 51 people dead. 
   Like the Christchurch shooter, Balliet livestreamed his killing spree with the hopes of inspiring more copycats. Footage from a camera that he strapped to his head showed him planting explosives outside the synagogue in Halle that appeared not to detonate. 
   Frustrated by the failure, Balliet turned away from the door and aimed his gun at a woman passing by. He shot her once in the back and then twice more as he sped to a nearby kebab shop, where he gunned down a second, male victim, according to Reuters. 
   Two other people were injured in the attack, but not critically. 
   Holger Stahlknecht, interior minister of Saxony Anhalt — where Halle is located — said authorities responded within seven minutes of receiving reports that a woman had been shot. They had Balliet in custody about 90 minutes after the attack began Wednesday afternoon. 
   “I am, like millions of people in Germany, shocked and dejected by the crime that was perpetrated in Halle yesterday,” Chancellor Angela Merkel said during a trade union congress in Nuremberg. 
   Members of the German Jewish community have expressed dismay since the attack, questioning why the synagogue was not protected by authorities on Yom Kippur. But the head of Germany’s police union told Reuters it would be impossible to protect all houses of worship at all times. 
   “We’d have to guard every synagogue, every church, every mosque, every holy place in Germany around the clock," Oliver Malchow said, “so I don’t know if this was a mistake that could have been forseen."   
