   Two people were killed outside a German synagogue Wednesday on the holiest day of the Jewish calendar by an apparently anti-Semitic gunman who livestreamed the attack on a gaming website. 
   The heavily-armed suspect had tried to force his way into the house of worship in the town of Halle, where 70 to 80 people were attending morning prayers in observance of Yom Kippur, authorities said. When he failed to get in, the gunman fatally shot a woman walking nearby before entering a kebob shop and killing another person. 
   “The assailant shot several times at the door and also threw several Molotov cocktails, firecrackers or grenades to force his way in,” Max Privorotzki, the head of Halle’s Jewish community, told news magazine Der Spiegel. “But the door remained closed — God protected us. The whole thing lasted perhaps five to 10 minutes.” 
   Witnesses told local outlet MDR they spotted the gunman get out of a car wearing military camouflage and carrying several weapons. Other news outlets reported that a hand grenade was thrown into a nearby Jewish cemetery. 
   Authorities said several other people were injured and the suspect was arrested. German Interior Minister Horst Seehofer described the shooting as an anti-Semitic attack likely inspired by far-right ideologies.  
   The man had spewed anti-Semitic vitriol on the video livestreamed on Twitch, an Amazon-owned gaming platform. SITE Intelligence Group, a counterterrorism organization that obtained the video, said it began with the gunman saying “my name is Anon and I think the Holocaust never happened.” He then mentions feminism and mass immigration, saying “the root of all these problems is the Jew.” 
   SITE Director Rita Katz said on Twitter that the man recorded the 35-minute video with a head-mounted camera, which showed him shooting a “random woman” in the street after failing to get into the synagogue. 
   Twitch later claimed to have “worked with urgency” to remove the content. The website said in a tweet that it would permanently suspend any accounts found to be reposting the “abhorrent act.” 
   The filming of such an attack echoes the March shooting in New Zealand that killed 51 people at two mosques. The white supremacist in that bloodbath livestreamed part of his attack on Facebook. 
   Richard Grennell, the U.S. ambassador to Germany, said 10 Americans were inside the synagogue during the incident, but all were “safe and unharmed.” 
   “This attack is an attack on all of us and the perpetrators must be held accountable,” the embassy tweeted. “We mourn the victims of this senseless violence.” 
   The identities of the victims were not immediately released. 
   The town of Halle, which is located about 100 miles southwest of Berlin, has a population of more than 233,000. 
   With News Wire Services   
