NZ beats West Indies by 66 runs in 3rd ODI; sweeps series
   CHRISTCHURCH, New Zealand (AP) — Mitchell Santner and Trent Boult shared six wickets as New Zealand beat the West Indies by 66 runs in the rain-affected third one-day international to sweep the series on Tuesday. 
   New Zealand made 131-4, batting first after winning the toss in a match reduced to 23 overs per side. The West Indies slumped to 9-5 — flirting with the lowest-ever score in an ODI — before finishing on 99-9 as it chased a target adjusted to 166 runs under the Duckworth-Lewis system. 
   Santner took 3-15 from five overs and Boult had 3-18 as the West Indies run chase crumbled. 
   West Indies captain Jason Holder made 34 from 21 balls and put on 48 in a sixth-wicket partnership with Rovman Powell (11) to carry the West Indies past Zimbabwe's record low score of 35, then past the West Indies' own low mark of 54. 
   Nikita Miller made 20 and Shannon Gabriel 12 in an unbroken 26-run partnership for the last wicket. 
   "It was an outstanding performance today," New Zealand captain Latham said. "It was nice to be able to get back on there after the rain delays. 
   "I thought we managed to scrap for a total and the way the boys came out and did the job with the ball was outstanding." 
   Latham said Ross Taylor's unbeaten innings of 47 from 54 balls made the critical difference between the teams after New Zealand slumped to 26-3. 
   "It was about building a partnership with Ross, trying to take it as deep as possible," he said. "I don't think we forecast as much rain as there was but it was nice we managed to get back out there, increase the run rate a bit then do the job with the ball." 
   New Zealand reached 83-3 from 19 overs when rain first drenched the match at Hagley Oval. 
   Taylor, 32 not out when the rain began, went on to top score with 47 and Latham made 37 from 42 balls with Taylor in a partnership of 73 for New Zealand's fourth wicket. Henry Nicholls added 18 not out from nine balls as New Zealand posted a competitive total in difficult circumstances. 
   "We started well with the ball and I think went really well in the field," Holder said. "It's just unfortunate we lost wickets up front again and we were not able to build momentum." 
   New Zealand won the first match by five wickets, and the second match by 204 runs. The hosts also swept the test series 2-0. 
   Copyright 2017 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.   
