David Rubinger, 92, Photographer Who Chronicled Israeli History, Dies
JERUSALEM — His first camera, an Argus, was a parting gift from a French girlfriend he met while serving with the British Army in Europe in 1945. She gave it to him as he boarded a train on his way back to his adopted home in Palestine. That, he said later, was when his lifelong love affair with photography began.
For more than six decades, David Rubinger, an Austrian-born photojournalist, chronicled the birth of the modern state of Israel, its leaders, its triumphs, its tragedies and its people. He died overnight at his home in Jerusalem, his family said on Thursday. He was 92.
“David eternalized history as it will be forever etched in our memories,” Reuven Rivlin, the president of Israel and a friend of Mr. Rubinger’s, said in a statement.
After freelancing and working for local Israeli publications, Mr. Rubinger got his break as an international photographer in the 1950s, when he was asked to shoot photos for an article that was published in Life magazine. He later shot mostly for Time, an association that lasted more than 50 years.
Mr. Rubinger is best known for what he called his “signature image” of Israeli paratroopers gazing up at the Western Wall in Jerusalem’s Old City on June 7, 1967, just minutes after it had been captured from Jordan during the Arab-Israeli War. Mr. Rubinger recalled that he had to lie down in the narrow space between the wall and some houses to shoot it, then rushed home to develop the film.
In a rash moment of generosity amid the euphoria of victory, he snipped off a negative and gave it to an army spokesman, who promptly handed it to the Israeli Government Press Office. In his 2007 autobiography, “Israel Through My Lens,” written with Ruth Corman, Mr. Rubinger recalled that the press office “in turn made prints and started distributing them to all and sundry for a dollar apiece.”
In retrospect, Mr. Rubinger said, he did not think it was a great photograph. He preferred one he took of the military chief rabbi, Shlomo Goren, blowing the shofar by the wall while being held aloft on the shoulders of troops.
He wrote of the Western Wall picture, “What made it significant were the circumstances under which it was taken, and it was this that caused it to emerge as the symbol with which so many people identify.”
A courteous man, Mr. Rubinger could nevertheless be fierce in fighting to protect his copyright of the image, having practically given it away to the press office. He said, however, that without the photo’s wide distribution, his international reputation might not have spread so rapidly.
He was also known for his intimate portraits of Israel’s leaders, some in tender moments with their spouses or in their homes. He later revealed one trick of the trade: He always made sure to take a few extra photos of the leaders with their security guards in the frame, then sent the guards copies, ensuring good access the next time.
David Rubinger was born in Vienna on June 29, 1924, the only child of the former Anna Kahane and Kalman Rubinger. His father was a scrap metal dealer, his mother a housekeeper.
After Nazi Germany annexed Austria in 1938, Kalman Rubinger was picked up off the street and sent to the Dachau concentration camp and later to another, Buchenwald. He was released in early 1939 and made his way to England, with a permit obtained by a sister there. David and his mother remained in Vienna.
As a teenager, David became active in Hashomer Hatzair, a Zionist socialist youth movement. In 1939 he was chosen under a youth quota system to immigrate to what was then British-controlled Palestine, which he called Eretz, Hebrew for “Land.” There he joined a kibbutz. Three years after he left Austria, his mother was deported by the Nazis to a camp in Belarus and perished there.
At 18, with World War II underway, Mr. Rubinger enlisted in the British Army. He went on to serve in North Africa and Europe. As part of a newly formed Jewish Brigade, he also helped smuggle Jews to Palestine.
During those years he met Claudette Vadrot, the Frenchwoman who gave him the Argus. He bought his next camera, a Leica, in 1946, in postwar Germany — paying for it, he said, with 200 cigarettes and a kilo of coffee.
That same year, in Germany, he married his first cousin, Anni Reisler. It was supposed to be a fictitious marriage of convenience, to get Ms. Reisler out of Germany and into Palestine. It soon turned into a real marriage, if a tempestuous one. The couple moved to Jerusalem and had two children, Tamar and Amnon. Anni Rubinger died in 2000.
Mr. Rubinger is survived by his two children, five grandchildren and five great-grandchildren.
He fought in Jerusalem in the 1948 war over Israel’s creation, then put down his gun and joined the Israeli Army’s maps and photography services unit, which was supposed to help provide intelligence.
Developing his first photographs in a makeshift darkroom in the bathroom of his tiny apartment, he got his first job as a photojournalist with Haolam Hazeh (This World), an anti-establishment Israeli publication.
In 1997, Mr. Rubinger was awarded the Israel Prize, his country’s highest honor.
Meticulous about recording and cataloging his thousands of images, Mr. Rubinger eventually sold his personal archive to Yediot Aharonot, a leading Israeli newspaper, where he was also briefly employed in the 1950s.
Yet he continued to photograph, taking his camera everywhere. Even in old age he rarely put it down.
