Marine Le Pen Loses Parliamentary Immunity Over Twitter Case
PARIS — In a clear show of its disapproval, the European Parliament voted Thursday to lift the parliamentary immunity of Marine Le Pen, the leader of the French far-right National Front, in a criminal case involving graphic photographs she posted on Twitter of acts of violence by the Islamic State.
In December 2015, Ms. Le Pen, a deputy in the European Parliament, posted three images, including one of the decapitated body of an American journalist, James Foley, who was killed by Islamic State militants in 2014.
French prosecutors accused Ms. Le Pen, who is now a candidate in France’s presidential election, of the crime of “dissemination of violent images,” for which she could face up to three years in prison if tried and convicted.
Ms. Le Pen said at the time that she had posted the photographs as a protest against a French television and radio journalist who had likened her far-right party to the Islamic State.
French prosecutors had asked the European Parliament to lift her immunity. As a strident critic of the European Union and the Parliament, she is not regarded warmly by many of its members.
Ms. Le Pen is facing a number of judicial entanglements as she pursues her presidential campaign. But none of them have dented her standing in polls or with her supporters, and she is widely expected to win a first round of voting on April 23.
Of the three major candidates in France’s presidential race, two are now deeply embroiled in criminal investigations: Ms. Le Pen, and the center-right candidate, François Fillon, who on Wednesday angrily announced that he was certain to be formally charged by March 15 in an embezzlement investigation.
Ms. Le Pen is also being investigated in connection with accusations that she paid National Front aides with money from funds provided by the European Union. According to the accusations, she was involved in a phony-jobs scheme in which aides working for her and other National Front deputies at the Parliament were actually carrying out party work.
The lifting of her parliamentary immunity concerns only the case involving the Islamic State photographs and not the more serious accusations of misusing European Union funds.
Her chief of staff was formally charged in the payroll case last week, and her bodyguard is also being investigated.
After Ms. Le Pen posted the gruesome images on Twitter in 2015, the family of Mr. Foley demanded that she delete the one of his body, saying that she had used it for political purposes. Ms. Le Pen claimed that she had not known it was a photograph of Mr. Foley. “Obviously, I withdrew it immediately,” she said at the time.
On Thursday morning, she told the French television network LCP: “I am a deputy. It’s my job to denounce Daesh,” using an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State that some consider pejorative. She added that she was the victim of a “politicized investigation.”
