Yankees place Didi Gregorius on 10-day disabled list, no timeline yet for return
   Injuries continue to mount for the Yankees, who announced Tuesday morning that Didi Gregorius has been placed on the 10-day disabled list with a left heel contusion. 
   The move is retroactive to Aug. 20, and the Bombers recalled first baseman Luke Voit from the RailRiders in response. 
   It leaves a large hole at the center of the lineup and the infield for the Yankees, who are already missing key bats in Aaron Judge and Gary Sanchez. 
   “Obviously Didi is so important to what we do,” manager Aaron Boone told reporters before Tuesday’s game against the Marlins. “He’s such an important player to us in the middle of our lineup, in the middle of our field. Sort of our quarterback out there, he does so many things intangibly well that we’ll certainly miss him.” 
   Gleyber Torres started at shortstop against the Marlins on Tuesday for Gregorius, who is batting .270 this season, with 22 HRs and 74 RBI. Neil Walker got the start at second base, and Boone said he also has Ronald Torreyes as an option to mix and match with Walker. 
   Torres was a highly-touted shortstop prospect in the Cubs organization before being moved over to second base to fit in with the Yankees, and Boone believes he has enough infield talent to bide time until Gregorius’ return, which he hopes is “a short amount of time.” 
   Still, the skipper had no definite timeline for the shortstop’s absence, and said the Yankees might have a better picture in the next few days. 
   “We’re hoping it’s short, but I think the next couple days will really tell us the picture,” Boone said. “He’s better today than he was yesterday. I know he was getting an upper body workout in today. He’s scheduled to see the doctor tomorrow night. So we’ll have a little better idea of where he’s at tomorrow night. 
   “Right now he’s working on getting the swelling out, which has gone down a little bit.” 
   The move to the disabled list was not exactly a surprise. Boone had hinted that the shortstop could end up on the DL after he awkwardly collided with Blue Jays first baseman Kendrys Morales in the first inning on Sunday. 
   “He’s got a pretty bad bruise on his heel, so it’s something that we’ll kind of monitor over the next 24 hours, could potentially be a DL thing,” Boone had said. “So, not great (news) there. We’ll just see where we are tomorrow. Nothing is broken or anything like that, but he has a pretty significant bruise and there is some swelling in there." 
   Voit, whom the Yankees acquired from the Cardinals in the Chasen Shreve deal, was sent down to Triple-A earlier this month when Ronald Torreyes rejoined the team. 
