SYDNEY, Australia — Malcolm Turnbull, Australia’s prime minister, survived a challenge to his leadership Tuesday, narrowly fending off a more conservative rival after growing speculation that he had lost the support of his party.
Mr. Turnbull called for a vote among Liberal Party colleagues in the wake of a failed effort to win support for an energy bill that would aim to reduce both prices and climate emissions. He won the vote over Peter Dutton, the Home Affairs minister, 48 to 35, and later called for a return to business as usual.
“When we’re united we can continue to deliver great results,” he said. Smiling and aiming to look calm at a news conference in Canberra, he added: “It’s really important that we put differences behind us and get on with our job of looking after the 25 million Australians who put us here.”
But the victory for Mr. Turnbull may be fleeting. Mr. Dutton, who resigned from his post as Home Affairs minister immediately after the loss, will move to the backbench, where he is expected to rally support for another challenge as early as Thursday.
He is aligned with a group of conservatives in Australia’s Liberal Party that includes the former Prime Minister Tony Abbott, whom Mr. Turnbull ousted with his own leadership challenge three years ago. And as a group, they have become more confident and empowered over the past few months as polls have continued to show the party and Mr. Turnbull losing favor with voters.
A new election is due anytime between now and next May, heightening pressure for some kind of change that might improve the Liberal Party’s chances. It holds only a one-seat majority in the House of Representatives, and a handful of seats in Queensland — the state where Mr. Dutton is from — are considered to be up for grabs or leaning toward losses for the Liberals.
And yet, short-term concerns could cause long-term problems. Australian voters have previously made clear that they do not welcome the revolving door of leadership that has characterized the past decade of Australian politics.
[Sign up for the Australian Morning Briefing to get the news you need to start your day, in your inbox Monday through Friday.]
The last leader in Australia to serve an entire term without a leadership challenge or call for an early election was John Howard, who left office in 2007.
Some lawmakers tried to rally for a degree of unity and a return to simple legislating.
“I’d simply say to my colleagues, the circus has to stop,” Darren Chester, a member of Parliament for the Nationals, told reporters. “There’s been a vote, the prime minister won, back the prime minister, give him a chance to finish the job he started.”
But some experts said the Liberals seemed unable to grasp the risks that come with party division and backbiting.
“I honestly think they are so far removed from the people,” said Susan Harris Rimmer, a law professor at Griffith University in Queensland. She added that “most people are just looking for competence.”
Mr. Dutton, a former police officer responsible for Australia’s security and immigration system, is a polarizing figure. With a chaotic ascension to leadership, some analysts said he and the Liberal Party would be trading one challenge in Mr. Turnbull, who is seen as lacking sufficient backbone, for another, who is known for rigidity and a cold, calculating mien.
Jill Sheppard, a lecturer at the Australian National University, was one of many who doubted Mr. Dutton’s chances in a general election.
“That would really give the Liberal Party no chance of winning the election,” she said. “You’d be combining everything that Australians are sick of in Australian politics.”
But Mr. Dutton and his allies seem to believe they are ascendant, first within party ranks and perhaps later with the public.
Analysts said his resignation was typical of would-be challengers who do not immediately succeed only to try again.
“He will leverage his failure of his exclusion from the government and try to rally supporters around him,” Dr. Sheppard said.
In an era of President Trump and Brexit, many of his supporters — and even some critics — are hesitant to bet against him.
