Mozambique Cyclone Wiped Out the Nation’s Food. Now Aid Is in Short Supply.
MASSANE, Mozambique — When the water reached their feet, the family scrambled up a mango tree. Augusto Brás, a sinewy farmer, hauled two of their children to the higher branches while his wife, Amélia Augusto, balanced on a lower bough. They clung on for three days, as the cyclone howled around them.
When the water level crept up the tree trunk, stopping at about six feet, they prayed. A rescue helicopter swooped overhead on the third day and flung out a box of biscuits. Mr. Brás swam through the water to catch it. Ms. Augusto wept: their 8-year-old son, Francisco, had been swept away in the torrent as they ran from their home.
There was little time to mourn as the family, back home three weeks later, fought to stave off hunger. Around the mound of broken bricks that was once their house stretched a vista of devastation: fields upon fields of felled crops, maize and rice, their principal source of food for the coming year, now gone.
“We have to collect what’s rotten,” said Mr. Brás, holding out a handful of sodden maize plants that he had scavenged from a nearby field. “This is all we’ve got, for now.”
The tropical cyclone known as Idai, which barreled through southern Africa last month, ravaged one of the poorest corners of the planet. In Mozambique, which bore its brunt, it leveled 110,000 homes, inundated entire towns and left a vast swath of rich farmland waterlogged or smeared in mud. The official toll is 603 dead, but officials suspect many more victims were washed-out to sea.
The cyclone wiped out the main source of food in a country where nearly half the population already lived below the poverty line. Almost 3,000 square miles of farmland were destroyed, weeks before the annual harvest. People like Amélia Augusto and Augusto Brás need sustained help for another year just to survive.
In the weeks since the cyclone, a vast international aid campaign has swung into action. That effort — hospitals-in-boxes transported by boat, food dropped from planes, and 800,000 people immunized against cholera — helped to avert the worst. The rescuers had some lucky breaks. The World Food Program snapped up 30,000 tons of rice stuck at port in the flood zone, providing an instant source of food.
But the outpouring of support has only nipped at the short-term needs. Cyclone Idai cost Mozambique as much as $773 million in direct economic losses, as estimated by the World Bank. The fund-raising appeal coordinated by the United Nations to cover the initial emergency was for only $282 million — a far cry from the nearly one billion dollars pledged within days to rebuild Notre-Dame Cathedral in Paris after last week’s disastrous fire. As of Saturday, $74 million had been raised toward the U.N.’s goal for Mozambique.
Idai’s first victim was the city of Beira, one of the most important ports in southern Africa. Winds up to 105 miles an hour crushed giant dockside storage silos like tin cans, and whipped tin roofs from the shanties in a nearby slum. At least 61 people were killed in the city.
At a farm outside Beira, workers rushed to shore up crumbling fences and prevent 26,000 crocodiles being raised there from breaking free.
