Breastfeeding is ‘so superior’ to anything billion-dollar formula industry can make  experts
   After the U.S. threatened nations with sanctions for supporting breastfeeding measures at a World Health Assembly gathering in May, experts are speaking out in support of breastmilk’s far superior health benefits for newborns. 
   “Breastfeeding is something we recommend to every woman – it is so superior to anything we can make in a factory,” pediatrician and senior medical director for WebMD, Hansa Bhargava told The News. “Some women might have difficulty but most potential problems (with breastfeeding) can be worked through with doctors and nurses. And it’s free!” 
   In some areas of impoverished countries – like Ecuador, Venezuela and Bangladesh, who each tried to stand up to the U.S. delegation — where families don’t have access to proper refrigeration, heating or even clean water, expensive formula isn’t a realistic option. 
   “It’s important to realize that people in poverty can’t afford food or things they need so I would again point to the freeness of breastmilk,” Bhargava said. 
   The Trump administration’s attempt to weaken or even block the resolution resulted in the U.S. delegation’s threat to the country of Ecuador that if it supported the World Health Organization measure, the American government would no longer lend military aid to the nation’s northern border with Colombia – a war-ravaged region overflowing with violence, the New York Times reported. 
   The newspaper called into question the Trump administration’s intentions with blocking something that simply highlights the scientifically proven benefits of breastfeeding by claiming the delegation was “embracing the interests of infant formula manufacturers” over what’s healthier for the world’s babies. And many advocacy groups agree. 
   “The Trump administration resorted to such high-pressure tactics because it’s a $70 billion battle for baby’s first food,” executive director of 1,000 Days, – a non-profit organization dedicated to improving nutrition for women and children over a baby’s first 1,000 days of life – Lucy Sullivan, told the Daily News. “So it’s interesting that the President tweeted about formula availability since there are 113 different kinds.” 
   President Trump called the Times’ report a “fake news story” on twitter Monday, writing that the “U.S. strongly supports breast feeding but we don’t believe women should be denied access to formula.” 
   But the resolution’s goal was to “protect, promote and support breast-feeding” and “restrict the promotion of food products” that can have destructive effects on infants. 
   A 2016 study found that some 800,000 newborn deaths could be avoided and $300 billion in health care costs saved if universal breastfeeding occurred. And the health benefits don’t stop with the child. 
   “Breastfeeding helps moms in several ways,” Bhargava said, “from preventing cancers and cardiovascular disease to stopping post-delivery bleeding and aiding in weight loss. In babies, it decreases the risk of infections, – even something as simple as ear or as serious as sepsis – builds the immune system and long-term has shown to have impacts on allergy and asthma risks. And it’s convenient. It’s there, ready to serve instantaneously. 
   “It makes sense for anyone.” 
   The President’s further claim that malnourished women and families in poverty need access to formula as a breastmilk alternative isn’t a viable argument, according to Sullivan. 
   The shift in attention away from the importance of breastmilk and instead to the formula industry by the Trump administration is a marked change from former President Obama’s, Sullivan told The News. The “big diary” countries, like Australia, New Zealand, and many European Union nations, were once aligned with us on infant feeding practices. 
   “This one (WHA summit) was different because it’s a different administration that created a different environment,” she said. “They went in with an ‘America first’ attitude and walked out America only with the world united against a bully. Some nations, like Bangladesh, spoke valiantly against the U.S.” 
   In the end, it was the Russian delegation that sided with the Assembly and other nations and introduced the resolution to support breastfeeding. 
   “We’re not trying to be a hero here, but we feel that it is wrong when a big country tries to push around some very small countries, especially on an issue that is really important for the rest of the world,” a Russian delegate told The Times. 
   The U.S. then largely withdrew its attempts and walked away with only minor wording changes on two small parts of the motion. One permits the words “evidence based” to accompany the long-standing, 40 years-worth of evidence that supports breastfeeding – a tactic that some say may undermine efforts to help new mothers learn about feeding practices and support programs. 
   “In countries that have high levels of infant mortality rates,” Sullivan said, “hundreds of thousands of these deaths could be prevented if these babies were breastfed in accordance to guidelines.”   
