Act of Defiance Casts Harsh Light on Europe’s Deportations of Asylum Seekers
OSTERSUND, Sweden — When she boarded the plane, Elin Ersson had no intention of flying. Her goal was to ensure another passenger disembarked to avoid what she feared would be his certain death.
The man was an Afghan asylum seeker seated in the rear of the Turkish Airlines flight as it awaited departure from Gothenburg, Sweden, accompanied by officials assigned to transport him back to Kabul, Afghanistan.
In a 14-minute act of defiance on Monday, livestreamed via her mobile phone, Ms. Ersson refused to sit, delaying the departure. She withstood yelling by impatient passengers and crew members. She calmly responded: “I am doing what I can to save a person’s life.”
The authorities finally relented and took the man off the plane — a moment of vindication for Ms. Ersson, a Swedish college student and migrant-rights activist with rosy cheeks, oversize glasses and an earnest resolve.
Her video struck a nerve with millions as it reverberated across social media and cast a harsh light on the policy practiced by Sweden and other European countries of forcibly returning rejected Afghan asylum seekers to their homeland, one of the world’s most dangerous places.
But while her protest at least temporarily halted that particular deportation, there is no indication that the policy will end. Thousands of Afghans who unsuccessfully seek sanctuary in Europe are routinely returned against their will.
Afghanistan’s protracted war has made it the leading source of refugees, after Syria. The country has struggled to maintain peace and fight the Taliban insurgency that followed the American-led invasion in 2001.
Security has worsened since 2017 with the strengthening of the Taliban and other groups, including a local Islamic State affiliate. In the first half of this year, the civilian death toll reached a record high, according to a report released by the United Nations this month.
In some ways Europe is replicating what Afghanistan’s immediate neighbors, notably Pakistan, have done for years: forcibly returning hundreds of thousands of Afghan asylum seekers, including many who had left Afghanistan years or even decades ago.
Gerry Simpson, associate director of the refugee rights program at Human Rights Watch, said that involuntary returns of Afghans from Europe could “fan the flames” of security disintegration in Afghanistan.
“The recent U.N. statistic on record civilian casualties across Afghanistan — and Afghanistan’s ongoing struggle to help the 600,000 Afghan civilians coerced out of Pakistan in 2016 — underscores the need for the E.U. to wait until Afghanistan is more stable before returning asylum seekers to the country,” Mr. Simpson said.
Afghans seeking asylum face special legal challenges. Other countries are allowed to forcibly return them to Afghanistan. Refugees fleeing nations at war like Libya, Syria and Yemen cannot be forcibly returned under international law.
A diminished tolerance for migrants in Nordic countries, where generous policies have been walked back in recent years, also make it harder for Afghans to successfully gain asylum. This year, only 31 percent of asylum requests by Afghan adults and minors were accepted by Sweden, migration authorities say, a historic low.
The deportations have led rights groups to call for a halt to involuntary returns of Afghans until the country is more stable.
The United Nations refugee agency has expressed concern that the asylum claims of so many Afghans are rejected despite the violence in their home country. Still, while the agency could declare a moratorium on forced returns, it has not yet taken such a step.
Kathryn Mahoney, a spokeswoman for the refugee agency, said she was not familiar with the details of the case Ms. Ersson had publicized so dramatically.
But Ms. Mahoney said that “we always encourage and advise governments to exercise caution and due diligence before executing any return.”
Ms. Ersson made clear during a news conference on Thursday that she did not expect Sweden’s deportation policy to ease anytime soon.
In fact, her actions didn’t even prevent the deportation of a man her protest had initially been intended to save. The family of the man, Ismaeil Khawari, 26, had reached out to her and other advocates to halt his departure, but he was not aboard the plane when Ms. Ersson arrived.
Instead, Mr. Khawari was driven to Stockholm and was deported to Kabul the next day.
When Ms. Ersson realized he was not among the passengers, she redirected her cause to save an older Afghan man who was also being deported. As of Friday, his whereabouts remained unclear.
Mr. Khawari, however, has arrived back in Afghanistan, where his family says he is already struggling. A sister said he had suffered psychological trauma after witnessing his father’s death more than two decades ago.
“Ismaeil was with my father when he was killed by the Taliban,” said the sister, Basireh Khawari, 21. “He managed to escape when they tried to kill him, too. He couldn’t get away from the image of that memory.”
The family fled to Iran. Another of Mr. Khawari’s sisters, Donya Khanzadeh, 22, moved to Sweden eight years ago as an unaccompanied minor and successfully applied for asylum. Her sister and mother later joined her and received residency permits as part of a family reunification program. But Mr. Khawari, her brother, was ineligible because he was no longer a minor, Ms. Khanzadeh said.
So he made his way to Sweden alone, and entered the country illegally in 2014, hoping to gain asylum to live with the family in Gotene, on Lake Vanern northeast of Gothenburg. According to his family, Mr. Khawari’s asylum claim was first rejected about 18 months later and he was eventually placed in detention in Gothenburg.
While Swedish authorities acknowledge Afghanistan’s dangers, each asylum application is evaluated on its own merits, said Fredrik Beijer, legal director with the Swedish Migration Agency.
“Asylum cases are always assessed on an individual basis — the individual’s risk,” Mr. Beijer said. “What case does he have? What problems is he presenting? What will happen if he goes back to a place where he comes from?”
If the applicant is not a minor and cannot prove an immediate or recent threat of harassment or persecution, Mr. Beijer said, having family in Sweden and no network in Afghanistan is insufficient.
When Mr. Khawari was deported, his family was given little information on his whereabouts and relied on calls from fellow detainees. His sisters went to the airport on Monday and guessed he might be on the Turkish Airlines flight, alerting Ms. Ersson, who bought a ticket to board so she could stage her livestream protest.
They did not know they were wrong until Ms. Ersson disembarked and told them.
On Wednesday afternoon, the family got a call from Mr. Khawari, who was back in Kabul, where he had not lived in more than 20 years.
He told their mother he was in the hospital.
“I’m afraid that Ismaeil will die in Afghanistan like other innocent people,” Ms. Khanzadeh said. “Because it is a place where when you go out of your home, you never know if you will return.”
