'Great Dying' of Indigenous peoples during colonization of America caused Earth's climate to change
   The “Great Dying” of Indigenous people during the 15th century colonization of America caused the Earth’s climate to change, a recent study says. 
   The study, from a team of scientists at the University College London, was published on the science and medicine research database Science Direct. Research showed that the number of indigenous people that died impacted the Earth’s climate and caused it to cool prior to the Industrial Revolution. 
   While the exact population can be difficult to pinpoint, the study estimates the Native American population “pre-contact” with the Europeans at 60.5 million people. 
   When Europeans began to colonize America at the end of the 15th century, they brought diseases including smallpox, typhus, measles, influenza, and diphtheria that the Native Americans living there had never before encountered, according to New World Encyclopedia. 
   The widespread epidemics, along with warfare, famine and slavery killed off an estimated 54.5 million people — approximately 90% of the indigenous population. This widespread death of the Native American people has become known as the “Great Dying.” 
   According to the study, the number of indigenous people that died caused agricultural activity to be reduced, leading to a “secondary succession” of land. 
   Secondary succession occurs when “a previously occupied area is re-colonized” after a “disturbance that kills much or all of its community,” according to Khan Academy. This means land areas being used by Native Americans for agriculture, among other uses, would have been able to naturally grow back. 
   This land use change (LUC) and increase in naturally-growing plant species would have caused an increase in carbon intake — removing carbon from the Earth’s atmosphere and cooling the planet, the study concluded. 
   According to the study, this provides evidence that humans would have impacted the “Earth system” for centuries before the Industrial Revolution. 
   The study used data including atmospheric carbon concentrations, global surface air temperatures and factors that could have potentially changed it, land use change in the Americas and LUC in the rest of the world among other factors from the years 1000 to 1800. 
   Around 1520 to 1610, there was a “near-constant” uptake of carbon. After 1610, the carbon uptake stopped. 
   This uptake in carbon that resulted in the cooling of the planet could have contributed to the coldest part of the “Little Ice Age” – a period of time from the early 14th century to the mid-19th century when mountain glaciers expanded in areas including Alaska, New Zealand, and the European Alps, according to Britannica. 
   During this period, many parts of Europe and the North Atlantic region suffered “frequent cold winters” and colder summers with heavy rainfall that led to crop failures and famine. 
   The “Great Dying” and carbon uptake shortly thereafter correlates with the only period in time where the “Little Ice Age” seemingly affected the entire planet, according to the study. 
   Previous data has never linked LUC and the widespread death of Native Americans with climate change, the study said.   
