   Harvey Weinstein is demanding a federal judge in Los Angeles slam the brakes on Ashley Judd’s lawsuit against him pending the outcome of his criminal case in Manhattan. 
   The pariah producer says in a new court filing that he’ll be “forced” to invoke his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination if deposed for Judd’s sexual harassment and defamation claims. 
   In a Tuesday statement to the Daily News, Judd’s lawyer blasted the move as a “baseless delay tactic.” 
   The lawyer said there’s no reason Judd should have to wait when it comes to other witnesses. 
   “There is no basis to stay Ms. Judd’s civil claims against Mr. Weinstein. She is suing him for the damage he caused to her career when he maliciously lied about her to other filmmakers. He cannot silence witnesses to his defamation against Ms. Judd just because he allegedly sexually assaulted several women years later,” lawyer Theodore J. Boutrous Jr. told The News. 
   Weinstein, 66, was arrested in New York on May 25 and indicted on charges he raped one woman in 2013 and forced another woman to perform oral sex on him during a separate incident. 
   The Manhattan District Attorney filed additional charges July 2 alleging Weinstein raped a third woman. 
   Weinstein also is the target of active criminal investigations in the Southern District of New York as well as in Los Angeles County and London, according to his Monday filing in federal court in Los Angeles. 
   “It is well-settled that a civil action should be stayed pending a related criminal action involving similar conduct where the defendant risks incrimination,” Weinstein’s lawyers argued in their motion for the stay. 
   “If a stay is not granted, Weinstein will be forced to invoke his Fifth Amendment rights, thus rendering him unable to defend himself in the civil matter,” the paperwork states. 
   “In the absence of a stay, (Judd’s) action unfairly burdens Weinstein’s constitutional rights to defend himself against the criminal charges and will potentially interfere with a criminal prosecution,” the filing claims. 
   Judd filed her civil lawsuit back in April, claiming Weinstein defamed her to “Lord of the Rings” director Peter Jackson in the late 1990s after she allegedly rejected Weinstein’s sexual advances in a Beverly Hills hotel room. 
   She claims Weinstein’s bad-mouthing caused a domino effect in her career because Jackson was considering her for a role in the billion-dollar “Rings” franchise. 
   Such a plum part likely would have led to other high-profile opportunities, but Jackson removed her from consideration after speaking with Weinstein’s company in or around 1998, her lawsuit contends. 
   Judd alleges in her complaint that Weinstein lured her to a suite of the Peninsula Beverly Hills hotel under the guise of a business meeting in 1996 or 1997, stripped naked and asked her to engage in massage and watch him shower. 
   She says it wasn’t until after she stepped forward in a 2017 New York Times exposé that she learned Weinstein allegedly trash-talked her to Jackson. 
   Jackson blew the whistle in December 2017 when he told the New Zealand website Stuff that he was close to casting Judd in “Lord of the Rings” but passed her over “as a direct result” of “false information” he received from Miramax regarding Judd and fellow actress Mira Sorvino, another Weinstein accuser. 
   “I recall Miramax telling us they were a nightmare to work with and we should avoid them at all costs,” Jackson told Stuff. 
   “At the time, we had no reason to question what these guys were telling us, but in hindsight, I realize that this was very likely the Miramax smear campaign in full swing,” he said.   
