   Long Island native Andrea Sicignano made the difficult decision to leave Madrid in mid-December after being sexually assaulted — which she shared in a harrowing post that went viral on Facebook — but she says she’s finding peace in the new year and healing both physically and mentally back in New York. 
   Sicignano’s bravery and decision to seek justice against her attacker became a source of empowerment for others, especially other sexual assault survivors. 
   Since her attack — which was first reported to authorities on Dec. 9 according to Spanish newspaper El País — Sicignano told the Daily News physically, she is “almost entirely healed.” 
   “I still have some deep cuts that are taking their time, and my nose is still sensitive, as the fractures are still healing,” the 27-year-old wrote to the Daily News. 
   The 2010 Lindenhurst High School grad has begun to make peace mentally as well, and plans to meet with a counselor. 
   “Mentally, I am in a very good place right now. I’ve been forced to make some decisions about my future that I assumed I had more time to figure out. This incident has definitely expedited my decision making and there’s been a lot on my mind. So my mind has stayed very active throughout the last few weeks, which I feel is the best way to immediately recover from a situation like this,” Sicignano said. 
   Sicignano studied environmental science at the University at Buffalo, and since graduating has spent the last five years traveling the world. 
   She traveled “both solo and accompanied” to locations such as Central America, Hawaii, Southeast Asia, Indonesia, Singapore, New Zealand and the Phillipines — and among those travels, met her boyfriend while living in Australia for a year. 
   Travel has been extremely for Sicignano — she converted a mobile home to live in during her travels in Australia became a certified Open Water SCUBA Diver in the Philippines with her boyfriend and has continued to study and teach throughout her travels. 
   Sicignano moved to Spain in June to teach English while continuing to take Spanish classes in hopes of becoming fluent in the language. In early December, Sicignano was attacked while trying to get home after a night out with a friend, and made the difficult decision to return to New York from Europe to heal. 
   “Spain was a new opportunity for me to live in, and explore Europe. I am very sad to leave it behind me, but that doesn’t mean I won’t continue to see the beautiful cities and countries that Europe has to offer,” she said. “I don’t know exactly what the future has in store for me, but I hope to continue down the education path I’ve been on.” 
   When she shared her story on Facebook, Sicignano said she was initially thinking of other girls in a Facebook group called “Madrid: Girl Gone International” who were also traveling alone. While she was traveling alone in Spain, Sicignano said what happened to her “could have happened anywhere in the world” and wanted her story to “warn others.” 
   Sicignano has said the feedback she got when sharing her story was initially “a bit overwhelming,” but is glad to see how her post has helped others. 
   “I am so happy to know how many people it has reached far and wide,” Sicignano wrote. 
   “Madrid is not to blame. Spain is not to blame. Europe is not to blame. And travel is definitely not to blame. I think my post has increased awareness for a lot of people,” Sicignano said. 
   When Sicignano was attacked, she went to the hospital and worked with authorities to seek justice against her attacker. Sicignano identified her suspected attacker from a police lineup days after the incident, the man is now in police custody. 
   Despite her decision to come forward, Sicignano acknowledged many victims of sexual assault may be afraid to come forward against their attackers — for a number of reasons. 
   “I know my story is not unique. I know how many girls have experienced this, or something similar. But I also know how many girls have never said a word about it. And it’s easy to see why. The amount of negativity that surrounds my post is horrific. In a way those negative comments have been the hardest part of this entire ordeal,” Sicicnano said. 
   While Sicignano’s post now has over 91,000 likes and 45,000 shares, she has “stopped reading what people say” to or about her because some of the comments have been negative. 
   “For the most part it is overwhelmingly positive and supportive. But of course, the negativity lurks, and appears constantly. I can’t subject myself to that. It’s hard enough knowing what I could have done differently that night, but when complete strangers tell me I have no right to get drunk, or my friend should have never left me, or that I’ve made the whole thing up, well you can imagine how it might make me feel,” Sicignano said. 
   Sicignano has found a strong support system through family and friends since her attack. Her family — including her mother Toni, who lives in Florida; cousins Alana and Julia, who live elsewhere in Europe; and boyfriend James, who lives in England — were all in Madrid within 24 hours to support her after the attack. Sicignano has remained in New York since leaving Spain, but plans to return Europe in the next week. 
   “The healing process has been an interesting one. The first few weeks were very difficult. But with such an amazing support system around me, it’s easy to overcome a lot of the trauma, Sicignano said. 
   “I’m lucky to have so many great people in my life. I’m going to be okay. “ 
   Despite the negativity, many have expressed support and wished Sicignano well. Many have commended her for her bravery, and other survivors see her as a source of empowerment and have shared their own stories with her. 
   “Countless girls have messaged me privately telling me that something similar has happened to them. A disturbing amount of girls that I either know, went to school with, are related to me, or complete strangers,” Sicignano wrote. 
   As her story continues to be shared, Sicignano hopes it can help others. 
   “I hope that my message can spread the awareness that the subject is due. It may encourage other girls to speak up about what happened to them, take action to find justice if they haven’t already, or simply just know that they are not alone.”   
