   LOS ANGELES – Russell Westbrook is biased on the subject, but the OKC superstar believes the size of the market is not a factor for free agents. 
   “I don’t believe in small markets,” Westbrook said. “The world we live in, social media, wherever you’re at, if you’re doing the things you’re supposed to be doing, people know who you are. I’ve been in Oklahoma City my whole career. At one point in time I was extremely blessed and thankful to have about three or four commercials at the same time. And at that time I was overwhelmed about the things I had going on but to understand that of regardless where you’re – big market, small market, it doesn’t matter.” 
   That’s obviously not ideal for the Knicks since their biggest selling point is the market and an opportunity for exposure, but Westbrook is also underselling the allure of cities for certain players. In addition to a better social life, there are also added business opportunities. LeBron James chose L.A., in part, because of Hollywood. Kevin Durant pivoted to a tech businessman once he relocated to Silicon Valley. 
   Westbrook is a star in OKC. If he were in New York, he’d be a bigger star. 
   But in most cases, winning and the team environment trumps market. The Thunder were able to sell Paul George on re-signing even though he was being chased by his hometown Lakers. 
   “Just being consistent every year. Top of the West. Playoffs,” Westbrook said about the Thunder’s culture. 
   Enes Kanter’s best basketball buddy said the Knicks center is coping with his undesirable circumstance in New York. 
   “He already knows I’m here for him mate,” Thunder center Steven Adams said. “Whatever his path is, that’s his path. He’s got to make do with what he’s got, you know what I mean? He already knows that. He’s doing his best. That’s all you can ask for.” 
   Kanter, who was demoted from the starting lineup this season, has not formally requested a trade from the Knicks but both sides would prefer a separation. Kanter, 26, was traded last season to New York from OKC, where he struck up a friendship with fellow wisecracker Adams. 
   “Basically he came to our team. Just an international dude. For some reasons international dudes they sort of gravitate towards one another. Just cause they have the same feelings,” said Adams, who is from New Zealand. “I found out he was a bit of an a--hole, so he ended up being my best friend. I’m like, ‘Cool. So am I. So am I.’” 
