Inside Turkey  The Crackdown, and the Loyalist
In one section of Istanbul, an imprisoned journalist’s family tries to cope after Turkey’s crackdown. In another, a neighborhood leader is proud to have taken a bullet for his government during the coup attempt. This is the second part in the State of Emergency series, in which our correspondent takes us behind the scenes of today’s Turkey, a nation in crisis.
Just after noon, we set off for Turkey’s notorious Silivri prison to visit Nazire Gursel’s husband. She rides in a friend’s car today, but sometimes she takes a shuttle provided by the newspaper her husband works for, Cumhuriyet. So many journalists working for the paper have been arrested that it has hired a special bus service for their relatives.
Her husband, Kadri Gursel, a prominent columnist, is one of at least 81 journalists now imprisoned in Turkey, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists. Most of them were arrested after a failed coup attempt last July, accused of links either to the Islamist Gulenist movement or to a secular Kurdish militant group.
Mr. Gursel is paradoxically accused of both — an absurd charge, she says. He was a longtime critic of Gulenists. But still the police staged a follow-up raid on the family’s home, seizing his computer, and he was sent to prison in October.
Now, Ms. Gursel is doing what she can to try to help her husband and see him regularly, while trying to keep life as normal as possible for their son, Erdem.  
Once, she had hoped Mr. Gursel would be free in time for Erdem’s birthday, in mid-February. But their son turned 11 without his father. 
In the meantime, there is another in a long line of trips to prison to make. 
Their lives have increasingly become circumscribed by prison regulations. Trying to make her husband more comfortable, she brought him a coat. only to have it rejected because its color was too close to the blue that some of the security forces wear. Another one, with a hood, was also rejected. So she went shopping yet again, this time to an upscale mall in Istanbul. This shopkeeper knew exactly what to give her — she was the latest in a long line of prisoner’s relatives to ask.
“In what normal country does that happen?” Ms. Gursel asks, before we pull into a roadside canteen for lunch. “Where the shopkeepers in a mall in the middle of Istanbul, far from prison, know the specifications of a prison coat?”
Around 90 kilometers west of Istanbul, we are finally near Silivri prison. Previously lighthearted, Ms. Gursel’s mood now darkens. “I feel very nervous,” she says. “As I get closer to Silivri, this unlawfulness that we’re in becomes more concrete.”
Shortly after 3 p.m., we catch sight of the site itself, a sprawling series of compounds.
We pass through one checkpoint and park just before a second. Only Ms. Gursel can proceed any farther. “I feel like I’m in the Second World War,” she says, before heading inside. “My son watched a couple of movies about the Nazis, and when he came here, he asked: ‘Is this place like a Nazi camp?’ ”
While Ms. Gursel speaks to her husband through a window inside, I mill around the parking lot with the relatives of prisoners. It seems like a cross section of Turkish society. There are expensive Jeeps and cheap hatchbacks. Niqab-wearers walk past people with dyed-blonde hair. But no matter who they are, most carry flimsy black sacks — bags for the inmates’ laundry.
Shortly after 4 p.m., Ms. Gursel emerges with her own.
Can Cumurcu stands up a lot. It is partly because of his job: He is the muhtar, or elected headman, of a small neighborhood on the Asian side of Istanbul, and his role involves dealing with the administrative concerns of local residents. 
When I visited his office for an hour recently, he rose every few minutes to greet the latest local to pop by for a signature or permission slip. One wanted to know where he could buy a boiler.
“Just hang on!” Mr. Cumurcu said to me after another interruption, a telephone earbud dangling from his ear. “One more phone call!”
But there is another reason Mr. Cumurcu stands. During last summer’s coup attempt, the muhtar, a loyalist to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, led the resistance against rebel soldiers in his neighborhood. As the troops tried to storm the area, a bullet tore through his upper-right thigh.
The wound has not properly healed. “I have to stand to avoid the pain,” he said. 
Mr. Cumurcu took me on a tour of the area, Cengelkoy, and when he wasn’t embracing or chatting with residents, he showed me how events unfolded that night. 
We passed the spot where a group of breathless locals first told him that troops were on the move, shortly after 10 p.m. on July 15. He said that around an hour after that, a pro-coup army colonel approached him with a rifle and told him to go indoors. “Are you high?” Mr. Cumurcu recounted saying. “What have you drunk?”
The colonel was chased away. In his absence, Mr. Cumurcu organized a series of barricades, on this spot outside the local police station.
I asked if during those moments, Mr. Cumurcu had considered prioritizing his personal safety over his political loyalty. But the way he tells it, he did not think twice. He prayed. He prayed again. He spoke to his family as if this were the last time he would see them. And after calling the presidency to check whether Mr. Erdogan was still alive, he prepared for a long night.
Shortly after midnight, the soldiers returned. “Soldiers of Turkey!” Mr. Cumurcu remembered shouting. “Do not fire on your own people!” Moments later, the bullet hit him.
Seventeen other residents died there that night, including his nephew. But Mr. Cumurcu survived to become a hero — a defender of democracy.
As we strolled, I wondered if Mr. Cumurcu had any qualms about what his heroism later led to: the erosion of wider democratic values and the arrest of thousands of dissidents in a postcoup crackdown — including dozens of journalists like Mr. Gursel.
But when I raise this, Mr. Cumurcu claims that none of the latter are actually journalists. All of them, he argues, have in some way tried to undermine the state, which is not the role of the media. “In Britain,” he asks, referring to my home country, “are you not first for the state, and then communist or right wing after that?”
It is a question that hints at a particular conception of the individual’s role in a society, and one that helps explain why a man like Mr. Cumurcu might prioritize political loyalty over personal safety on a night like the coup.
Mr. Erdogan, Mr. Cumurcu said, has not just improved infrastructure and services since his party came to power in 2002. He has also brought dignity to pious Turks who felt ostracized by previous governments that, among other measures, upheld a ban on the Muslim veil in public institutions.
Mr. Erdogan, the head man said, “helped a group of oppressed people to rise.”
