Turkey Halts Campaign in Germany to Court Voters
ISTANBUL — Turkey’s governing party said on Tuesday that it would no longer send representatives to Germany to campaign for a constitutional amendment to drastically strengthen the Turkish president’s powers, raising the possibility of a de-escalation of a dispute between the two countries.
The decision is a change in direction by the Turkish government of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, which has frequently tried to send surrogates to Germany in recent weeks and subsequently accused Germany of Nazism for refusing to allow them to campaign freely.
About 1.4 million German residents have the right to vote in Turkey in an April 16 referendum on whether to expand Mr. Erdogan’s powers, but the president’s Justice and Development Party will now no longer try to directly court their votes.
The party’s decision follows a stern warning from the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, who on Monday said that Mr. Erdogan’s Nazi comparisons must stop “without ifs or buts.”
Mehdi Eker, a Justice and Development lawmaker and one of the party’s deputy chairmen, said the decision was pragmatic rather than a gesture of good will. “Since they have officially decided to ban or to make it difficult” to campaign in Germany, “that’s why we do not want to send our colleagues from now on,” Mr. Eker said in a telephone interview.
Justice and Development officials may continue to campaign elsewhere in Europe, Mr. Eker added, including in the Netherlands, which barred one Turkish minister from entry and expelled another this month.
Mr. Eker also refused to say whether the move would be accompanied by less heated language from party officials, who recently threatened to send a new wave of migrants to Europe as revenge for the behavior of German and Dutch officials. “It is not necessary to say that we will take steps back or steps forward,” Mr. Eker said.
In Germany, a pro-Erdogan organization, the Union of European Turkish Democrats, also told news outlets of the decision not to hold more events with visiting Turkish politicians. The announcement was welcomed by nervous German politicians who had grown increasingly concerned in recent days that Turkey’s conflicts might spill into German streets.
The change by Turkey followed the clearest warning yet from Ms. Merkel for it to stop using language about Nazi tactics. As she spoke on Monday, her foreign minister also met Turkish business executives. Germany is Turkey’s largest European trading partner, but it was not clear whether that status played a role in either Monday’s talks or Tuesday’s announcement.
Elsewhere in Turkey on Tuesday, Mr. Erdogan did not seem to have softened his tone. At a rally in Ankara, the capital, he said that Europe was racist, fascist and cruel, and he suggested that Turkey was no longer interested in joining the European Union.
Mr. Erdogan has been accused of hypocrisy for his criticism of European politicians. Inside Turkey, his own opponents say they are denied the rights of assembly that Mr. Erdogan expects his allies to be granted in Europe.
