The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks: 
• Unpaid domestic violence leave will be recognized in Australia, while paid leave is rejected.
• The Australian government remains tough on demands for ransom. How does it compare with its European counterparts?
• Donald Trump’s business dealings in Indonesia during his presidential campaign.
Advocates of paid leave in cases of domestic violence received a mixed victory yesterday. Workers in Australia are legally entitled to unpaid leave in cases of domestic violence, the Fair Work Commission ruled on Monday after hearing arguments from the Australian Council of Trade Unions. The commission heard from academics, researchers, statisticians and survivors of family violence.
But the panel rejected the council’s bid for paid domestic violence leave. “To be perfectly honest, we are disappointed,” said Ged Kearney, the president of the council. “We really do think the time is right, and there was no reason not to get paid leave.”
What impact could this decision have?
Domestic violence leave, even if unpaid, gives victims time to find safe housing as well as to seek support and legal services.
But the consequences will not be so straightforward. Australia has close to 120 modern awards (sets of employment conditions in each industry). Since standards vary across sectors, including who is covered under the awards, the decision on domestic violence leave does not apply to all workers. The council said it was also trying to change the National Employment Standards, or minimum employment conditions that apply to all workers.
Some large corporations already offer paid domestic violence leave, like PwC Australia, which confirmed that it had testified to the commission in support of the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
But paid domestic leave may not be one-size-fits-all, especially for small businesses, which could feel the strain of paid-leave policies more than bigger companies. Moo Baulch, the chief executive of Domestic Violence NSW, said that although the decision suggested a cultural shift and indicated a growing recognition of domestic violence as a concern for employers, smaller businesses might struggle to provide 10 days of paid leave.
A more nuanced conversation is necessary, some suggested. “Just putting it into place is not enough. You certainly need some structures and potentially some training and some conversations around that leave,” Ms. Baulch said. That might include training for senior employees or having a point person in the human resources department whom domestic abuse victims can consult in confidence.
“You actually create a culture in the workplace to understand the dynamics of domestic violence and recognizing it impacts almost every family in Australia in some shape or form,” Ms. Baulch said.
The production is sharp and modern. The narrator speaks fluent English with a South African twang.
Last weekend, Dr. Kenneth Elliott, an Australian surgeon who was kidnapped, appeared in a video released by Nusrat al-Islam wal Muslimeen, a terrorist group in Mali that is affiliated with Al Qaeda.
“No genuine negotiations have begun to release your children,” the narrator says in the video, which was released on Telegram, an encrypted messaging app favored by many militants. (Last month, the Australian government pressed its international intelligence allies to compel such apps to hand over decrypted messages to the authorities.)
Mr. Elliott, 82, and his wife, Jocelyn Elliott, were kidnapped by the group in Burkina Faso in January 2016. Ms. Elliott was released in February after a mediation effort led by neighboring Niger. No ransom was paid.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia said that the government preferred to say “very little” about the episode and thanked the governments of Niger and Burkina Faso.
Why doesn’t the Australian government do more for its kidnapped citizens? 
Rukmini Callimachi, the Times correspondent who covers the Islamic State, explained that the group that abducted Dr. Elliott rebranded recently.
“The group that took the couple is AQIM,” she said, referring to Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, or the Qaeda branch active in parts of North and West Africa. “They renamed themselves last year but remain Al Qaeda’s affiliate in the region, and they have long financed themselves through ransoms.”
A 2014 article by Ms. Callimachi described how the affiliate generates staggering profits through kidnappings and ransoms. Among the many revelations of the report was a crucial figure: about $90 million, or 117 million Australian dollars — which is the amount the group raked in from kidnapping Europeans between 2008 and 2014. The bulk of that came from efforts to secure the release of French captives. Several countries closely allied with Australia — including the United States and Britain — refuse to pay a ransom, which some experts say has led terrorist groups to avoid kidnapping citizens from those nations.
During a Senate committee inquiry in 2010, the Australian Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade outlined its reasoning: “The Australian government does not pay ransoms,” it said. “The no-ransom policy is standard across all our major international consular partners and many other countries as well, on the basis that paying ransom would encourage other kidnappings.”
While Donald Trump was campaigning for president — and proposing his “travel ban” — he had an eye on the world’s most populous Muslim-majority nation: Indonesia.
But this was a matter of business, not policy.
Last night, “Four Corners,” a news program of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, looked into Mr. Trump’s business dealings in the country, which includes the development of a large Bali resort that will overlook the temple of Tanah Lot, one of the island’s most sacred sites.
What has emerged from the investigation? 
The report revealed the deals Mr. Trump made with politicians in Indonesia, including having the government build a toll road that would benefit the planned development of a Trump resort. “He was saying that it’s impossible without the toll road,” Fadli Zon, the deputy speaker of Indonesia’s Parliament who met with Mr. Trump in September 2015, told the ABC.
