   Ronda Rousey lost her Olympic rings, several guns and a whole lot of headphones after a pair of skateboarding punks broke into her house. 
   The UFC star detailed the April burglary of her Venice Beach, Calif., home, and explained that the thieves had unfortunate timing — they chose to strike just as she and then-boyfriend Travis Browne were headed to New Zealand, where he was planning on popping the question. 
   "We stopped by the house right before we were going to leave for the airport, and he was going to sneak away and go ask my mom for permission [to marry me]," Rousey said on "Live With Kelly and Ryan" Wednesday. "And right when we got to the house, we realized we were robbed. And someone had been squatting in my house for three days, sleeping in my bed." 
   Rousey explained that the ransackers stole her Olympic rings (she won bronze in 2008 Beijing for judo), her guns, all of her "precious jewelry," credit cards and several pairs of headphones. 
   "You don't realize everything at first, then you're like, 'Where's the headphones? Nope, all the headphones in my house are gone,'" Rousey said. 
   Luckily for Rousey, she and Browne, now her fiancé, were able to track down the culprits thanks to security footage that showed them holding skateboards. Rousey explained that she and Browne — all 6' 7" of him — headed across the street to a skate park and were able to find the pair right away. 
   "He's smart enough to not, you know, in the middle … we'll get sued pretty hard," she said of not taking matters into their own hands. "He found the police right then and they caught them. I wish five minutes with me was a sentence, but that would go under cruel and unusual punishment." 
   According to TMZ, the suspects are 21-year-old Zhamila Bolat and 20-year-old Alim Young. Young has reportedly served prison time for grand theft and petty theft charges, though neither have been formally charged for the April burglary. 
   Meanwhile, the 30-year-old Rousey is currently ranked as the UFC's No. 4 female bantamweight fighter in the world. She lost to Amanda Nunes at UFC 207 in December, and has yet to step back into the ring.   
