The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• Tesla will power South Australia with an enormous battery.
• Australia reacts to threats from North Korea.
• Airbnb guests prefer Australia’s countryside to the cities.
The world’s largest lithium-ion battery will be installed in South Australia in an effort to bolster the state’s energy supply, Jay Weatherill, the premier, announced today.
The energy-storage system will be delivered by Tesla and the French renewables company Neoen, which will be using its Hornsdale Wind Farm for the project.
How did the deal come about? 
In March, Lyndon Rive, the head of Tesla’s battery division, said the company could solve South Australia’s energy problems within 100 days of committing to provide backup power for the state.
The battery should stabilize the state’s renewable energy supply and provide residents with emergency backup power if needed.
Mr. Rive’s offer came after the state suffered a string of embarrassing power outages, first in September, and then through the summer, when South Australians were intentionally left without power because of an energy shortage.
Reacting to Mr. Rive’s comments, Mike Cannon-Brookes, the billionaire co-founder of the Australian software company Atlassian, asked Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, on Twitter if he was “serious” about the 100-day claim. It turns out he was.
Far from mere salesmanship, the guarantee appears to have been a factor in the contract. The government today confirmed that Mr. Musk had agreed to deliver the battery on those terms.
For Australia and its allies, the North Korean threat has felt perennial — something that for so long has almost put the country on the brink of confrontation. But with Pyongyang’s successful intercontinental ballistic missile test this week, which could possibly put Darwin within striking distance of the North’s missiles, it’s become a time of contemplation for Australia.
Vice Adm. David Johnston, the chief of joint operations of the Royal Australian Navy, said this week that the likelihood of a North Korean strike on Australia was “low.”
“There is very little risk at the moment to the northern part of our country,” he said in Canberra.
While Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull was in Hamburg, Germany, for the Group of 20 summit meeting, the acting prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, spoke about Australia’s military commitments.
“If North Korea was to deliver a warhead into the United States of America, then the Anzus alliance would be called in” to respond to the attack, he told Sky News, referring to the security pact that binds Australia and the United States. “If someone drops a nuclear warhead on a country, what do you think happens next?”
Mr. Joyce raised eyebrows with comments seemingly directed at China, revealing that Australia had “sympathy” with American efforts to impose stronger economic sanctions on China for its trade with Pyongyang. China is North Korea’s main ally and economic lifeline. It is also Australia’s biggest trading partner.
“How progressed do you want North Korea to get in the capacity to put a nuclear warhead into Darwin?” he asked.
Penny Wong, a Labor senator, branded the comments “utterly irresponsible.” A spokeswoman for Julie Bishop, the foreign minister, said, “The Australian government has no plans to introduce economic sanctions on China.”
Mr. Turnbull also clarified the government’s position on Friday, at the G-20 summit meeting.
Do Australians share Mr. Joyce’s urgency? 
One South Australian does.
Nathan Stewart of Adelaide Hills decided this week to restore a bunker left on his property by a previous owner. “It was built to withstand a nuclear attack,” Mr. Stewart told Seven News. “It’s the real deal.”
But other Australians, evoking the country’s breezy, isolationist attitude, took the news — and Australia’s place in the global pecking order — far less seriously.
Airbnb travelers in Australia are now longing more for fresh country air than bustling cities. A new report from the company examining the impact of Airbnb on Australian rural communities in 2016 found that more than half of guests stayed in nonurban areas.
For a business that, according to Deloitte, has added a staggering $1.6 billion to Australia’s gross domestic from 2015 to 2016, it seems the windfall — $287 million in earnings — is being spread around.
Where are people visiting? 
Sydney takes the crown as the fifth-largest Airbnb market in the world. But according to Deloitte, here are the top spots outside Australia’s state capitals that Airbnb users are flocking to.
New South Wales: Byron Bay, Nowra, Newcastle and Wollongong
Victoria: Geelong, Apollo Bay and Ballarat
Western Australia: Margaret River, Busselton, Dunsborough and Albany
South Australia: Robe, Victor Harbour, Mount Gambier and Kingscote
Queensland: Gold Coast, Cairns
Northern Territory: Alice Springs, Katherine
Australian Capital Territory: Belconnen, Macquarie, Kaleen, Macarthur
Tasmania: Launceston
Ron Hellyer, an Airbnb host in Broken Hill, a town 13 hours west of Sydney, said that the No. 1 question guests ask him is why he lives there.
“We then tell them a story: the story of your family and your town and what it’s like,” he said. “We get them wanting to extend their time because there’s all these things they didn’t think they could do or see here.”
