Joint Taliban-ISIS Attack Kills Dozens, Afghan Officials Say
KABUL, Afghanistan — Dozens of civilians and militia forces were killed in northern Afghanistan in what officials on Sunday described as an attack by Taliban fighters teamed up with a commander claiming allegiance to the Islamic State. If true, the open cooperation between the militant groups, which have sometimes fought turf battles in the past, could be further trouble for the struggling Afghan government.
Sayad district, in northern Sar-e-Pul province, had put up a fierce defense over the past two years against attacks by insurgents as other parts of the province seemed to be buckling under Taliban pressure. Several local officials say the Taliban joined forces with Sher Mohammed Ghazanfar, a local commander claiming allegiance to the Islamic State, to overrun the Mirza Olang area. Then he turned to blocking local militiamen, as well as civilians, from fleeing.
“According to our credible information, 50 people have been killed,” said Sharif Aminyar, the district governor of Sayad. Mr. Aminyar said 18 of the people killed had been members of the Afghan Local Police, a government militia, and other local militias on the government payroll. The rest were civilians.
“It was a joint Daesh and Taliban operation,” Mr. Aminyar said, using the Arabic name for the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS or ISIL. “The Taliban were led by Mullah Nader and Daesh was led by Sher Mohammed Ghazanfar.”
“Despite several demands for air support and the special forces,” he said, “the demands were ignored by central government. They told us the air force was busy in other provinces.”
Zabihullah Mujahid, a spokesman for the Taliban, denied any cooperation with the Islamic State on the operation and said local residents had misunderstood. “Ghazanfar is not Daesh — he is our commander in Sar-e-Pul, a very active commander, and he is under our command, our flag,” he said. “He has allegiance with us.”
Mr. Mujahid denied allegations of civilian casualties, and said only militiamen had been killed.
Residents described a government effort over several days to try to evacuate people, a task that became impossible after militants overran the area.
Abdul Qadir, 25, said he had managed to escape with his mother, wife and two children. But his father and brother were not so lucky. Mr. Qadir lost a leg years ago, and he rode his family’s donkey, with his two children tied to his back, he said.
“I lost my brother and father,” Mr. Qadir said. “Now I have to take care of three families — my father’s family, my brother’s family and my own family.”
While the Taliban have been resurgent around the country, exerting increasing pressure in previously safe areas of the north, the Islamic State threat has largely remained contained. The group has been targeted by the Afghan Army and United States air power in its stronghold, the Achin district in Nangarhar province. But other, smaller pockets claiming Islamic State affiliation have also popped up in other parts of the country.
While the Taliban and fighters affiliated with the Islamic State have fought turf battles in the east, officials have long said the groups’ interactions in the north have been more complex, with the two often having a symbiotic relationship. Intelligence and security officials have expressed uncertainty over whether what operates as the Islamic State in parts of Afghanistan is really tied to the group’s headquarters in Syria and Iraq at all, or if it is just the Taliban and other militant groups with a new identity.
“One of the things we are concerned about here in Afghanistan, the reason we think that the entire world needs to be focused on Afghanistan, is the potential for convergence among the various terrorist groups in this area,” Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., the commander of NATO and American forces in Afghanistan, said at a news conference in April.
What is clear is that many of the attacks in the country claimed by the Islamic State have targeted the minority Shiites, and often in brutal ways. Last week, suicide bombers claimed by the Islamic State barged into a Shiite mosque in the western city of Herat as worshipers were standing for evening prayer and killed at least 37 people.
Those who were killed in Mirza Olang were also Shiites, belonging to Afghanistan’s Hazara ethnic group.
“This was a massacre — they executed 24 people at once, then they killed a woman and her husband near the mill, four people inside the mosque,” said Haji Ghulam Mehdawi, commander of local militias in the province.
Mr. Mehdawi said they had been in touch with the Taliban about retrieving the dead. The Taliban, he said, initially agreed for seven people to travel and pick up the bodies but then backtracked, saying seven people were not enough to carry the dead. Another 10 people have been sent in to help.
“The Taliban are saying, ‘It wasn’t us — it was Daesh that did it,’” Mr. Mehdawi said, adding, “What difference does it make? They are both cut from the same cloth.”
Other officials expressed concern that Mirza Olang had served as a buffer for the provincial capital, Sar-e-Pul city, and that now it would be under threat.
“For two years, this was the line of defense for Sar-e-Pul city,” said Masooma Ramazani, a member of the provincial council. “They kept trying, and they would be resisted. But now they finally broke the line.”
“These people resisted for so long, I am sure they wanted revenge,” she said.
