Netanyahu Accuses ‘the Left’ and the Media of Trying to Oust Him
JERUSALEM — In a pugnacious speech on Wednesday evening before thousands of supporters, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, embroiled in graft investigations, railed against “the left” and “the media that serves it,” contending that they had ganged up to overthrow him.
The occasion was a rally intended as a show of strength organized by loyalists from Mr. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud Party. Government ministers, legislators and about 3,000 activists attended, hoping to counter a growing sense in Israel that Mr. Netanyahu’s long political career could be edging to an ignominious close.
After one of Mr. Netanyahu’s closest former aides recently turned state’s witness in two cases involving suspicions of bribery, fraud and breach of trust, analysts said it appeared more likely that the prime minister would ultimately be charged.
Timed for the main evening television news broadcasts and carried live, Mr. Netanyahu’s address was partly a campaign speech and, some commentators said, partly a warning to potential rivals from within the party who might be planning on his political demise.
The crowd at the Tel Aviv convention center cheered, booed, chanted “Bibi, Bibi, Bibi!” – Mr. Netanyahu’s nickname – and carried placards with slogans like “Enough of the attempted putsch.”
In Trumpian fashion, Mr. Netanyahu denounced the “fake news media,” which he said had joined with “the left” in what he called “an obsessive and unprecedented witch hunt against me and my family, in order to carry out a coup.” The point, he said, was to press the law enforcement authorities to file charges, no matter what.
Mr. Netanyahu’s wife, Sara, who may soon face charges herself in a separate case involving suspicions about the misuse of public funds at the family’s residences, nodded in agreement in the front row.
Appealing to his right wing base, Mr. Netanyahu described the 1993 Oslo peace accord with the Palestinians as a “disaster” that ended in bus bombings. He ridiculed the current investigations, saying there were rumors that “soon the media will demand that Kaya be called for questioning – under caution!” referring to the Netanyahu family’s dog. Kaya has made the news a couple of times for biting visitors to the official residence and, more recently, because the Netanyahus’ older son, Yair, did not scoop up her waste when they were out for a walk.
And in an effort to raise the party’s morale, Mr. Netanyahu also spoke of Israel’s growth and achievements during his tenure over the past eight years. A political survivor who was first elected prime minister in 1996, he is currently serving his third consecutive term and fourth overall.
The prime minister was careful to avoid any overt criticism of the police or law enforcement authorities who are conducting the investigations against him in two cases involving accusations of illicit gifts from wealthy friends and back-room dealings with a local newspaper magnate in a bid for favorable coverage.
Critics noted that Mr. Netanyahu’s event in Tel Aviv was an extraordinary spectacle of a governing party essentially rallying against the country’s law enforcement authorities.
“It has never happened before,” said Dan Margalit, a veteran journalist on Israeli television. “It should not happen.”
Tzipi Livni, a centrist legislator and former justice minister who now sits in the opposition, wrote on Twitter: “The Likudniks are not corrupt, but Netanyahu is corrupting Israel. I am sure that many, many of the Likud voters — decent people and good citizens — are feeling uncomfortable this evening.”
Israelis have been demonstrating against Mr. Netanyahu on Saturday evenings near the home of the attorney general, Avichai Mandelblit, in the town of Petah Tikva in central Israel. The weekly protests began with a few dozen people, but grew to about 2,000 on Saturday night. The participants accuse Mr. Mandelblit of dragging out the investigations against Mr. Netanyahu, whose supporters have begun to hold counterdemonstrations in the same area.
