Pressed by Public Outcry, Russia Releases Jailed Actor
MOSCOW — Struggling to calm bubbling discontent, the Russian authorities on Friday freed a jailed actor whose conviction just days earlier for a supposed attack on a police officer had prompted pickets in front of the Kremlin’s executive office and a rare public show of solidarity from fellow entertainers, priests and teachers.
The actor, Pavel Ustinov, 24, was released from custody pending an appeal that will be heard next week. On Monday, a trial court in Moscow sentenced him to three and a half years in a penal colony for assaulting a police officer during his arrest at a recent protest rally in central Moscow.
The trial judge refused to admit as evidence a video that appeared to contradict the prosecution’s case, relying instead on the testimony of the officer, whose shoulder had been dislocated during the arrest. Prosecutors called for a sentence of six years.
The video showed four officers in riot gear attacking Mr. Ustinov in a busy Moscow square at the time of a protest rally nearby, pushing him to the pavement and hitting him with rubber batons. It was not clear why they had singled him out.
As the recording spread rapidly on social media, the visible discrepancy between the video and the verdict spurred a wave of public outrage that originated among Russian actors and spread from there.
Many high-profile actors posted videos of themselves making indignant statements against the case and the sentence. After the public clamor, prosecutors requested that the prison term handed down on Monday be lifted and that Mr. Ustinov be set free.
The solidarity campaign was unusual for Russia, where people in many professions are afraid to criticize the government for fear of losing their jobs — or worse. Many of the actors who stood up for Mr. Ustinov work in government-sponsored theaters and in state-supported films, making them particularly vulnerable to retaliation.
Daria Yegorova, an actress in the city of Perm, near the Ural Mountains, was criticized by her colleagues after she spo
