RIO DE JANEIRO — A state judge in Brazil ruled on Tuesday that the mining giant Vale was financially liable for damages caused when a dam breached a mining site in January, killing at least 247 people.
Judge Elton Pupo Nogeira did not specify how much the company would have to pay, saying it was not yet possible to determine the extent of harm caused when a gigantic wave of toxic waste escaped the breach, burying scores of people, including the mine’s employees, in the town of Brumadinho, in Minas Gerais State, on Jan. 25.
The damages are “not limited to the deaths that resulted from the event, since it also affects the environment locally and regionally, as well as the economic activity of surrounding communities,” the judge wrote.
The ruling was the first decision by a court to formally hold the company responsible for the disaster. Vale faces multiple criminal and civil investigations related to the dam breach that are expected to last years.
Prosecutors have said they intend to charge company executives for what they have characterized as a culture of negligence that enabled the disaster.
The authorities have recovered the bodies of 247 people killed by the dam breach, and 23 people remain missing.
Vale is a Brazilian company whose safety practices had come under scrutiny following a similar dam breach in 2015 in the village of Bento Rodrigues, also in Minas Gerais, which killed 19 people. That dam was operated by Samarco, a venture between Vale and the Anglo-Australian mining company BHP, which is facing a lawsuit related to the 2015 collapse. The dam in Bento Rodrigues was jointly owned by Vale and BHP.
The latest incident sparked a review of dozens of similar dams in Brazil, which were designed to store toxic waste from mining operations, a major industry in Minas Gerais. Several dams were found to be at risk of breaching, putting thousands of people at potential risk.
Judge Nogeira decided that about $2.8 billion in Vale assets that judicial officials froze earlier this year should remain in abeyance as investigations into Vale’s culpability in the disaster continue.
The company has projected that it will lose an estimated $4.8 billion from the disaster.
In a statement, Vale noted that Judge Nogeira had credited the company for cooperating in the investigations into the dam breach.
“Vale reaffirms its total commitment to the prompt and fair reparation of damages caused to the families, to the infrastructure of communities and to the environment,”  the company said. 
