Walmart Pulls Soviet-Themed Shirts After Lithuania Objects
Lithuanians have little fondness for Russia. Memories of decades of brutality linger, even more than a quarter century after the fall of the Soviet Union.
So a Walmart T-shirt with a hammer and sickle emblem was never likely to be a best seller there.
Now, it’s not being sold at all.
Lithuanian officials say Walmart, responding to their protests, has pulled the shirts from its online shelves — a move that chilled already icy relations between the countries.
On Wednesday, a day after the news broke, Russia’s Foreign Ministry lobbed insults at Lithuania’s Foreign Ministry on Twitter.
Earlier this month, Rolandas Krisciunas, the Lithuanian ambassador to the United States, wrote an impassioned letter urging the American retail giant to stop selling the T-shirts. “Horrific crimes were done under the Soviet symbols of a sickle-and-hammer,” he said.
“The decision to display and promote the symbols associated with mass murder of innocent people cannot and should not be viewed as an ordinary business decision,” Mr. Krisciunas wrote.
The hammer and sickle symbol — along with other Communist-era imagery — is banned in Lithuania, where the decades of harsh occupation by the Soviets left hundreds of thousands of citizens dead or exiled. The Lithuanian Foreign Ministry likened selling the hammer and sickle shirts to selling shirts with Nazi symbolism.
On Tuesday, the ministry announced — with what seemed a touch of pride — that Walmart had confirmed to it that the shirts would no longer be sold. A search of the products in question on the Walmart website on Wednesday revealed that the line of shirts, described on its website as “retro” — among the other merchandise was a polka-dot 1950s-style party dress and old VW ads — had been removed.
Lawmakers from other Baltic nations, including Estonia and Latvia, joined Lithuania’s call for the removal of the shirts.
Russia was not pleased, and was quick to strike back on Twitter. When Lithuania’s foreign minister, Linas Linkevicius, applauded Walmart’s decision, the Russian Foreign Ministry congratulated him sarcastically on the victory “in the important matter of T-shirts.”
Then it challenged Mr. Linkevicius to help preserve World War II-era Soviet monuments in Europe. Russian soldiers fighting there, the tweet said, “saved millions of innocent people, while sacrificing their own lives.”
The ministry went on to call Lithuania’s own history into question. It pointed a finger at Jonas Noreika, a controversial Lithuanian general who was once lauded as a hero but whose family says he had anti-Semitic views and was complicit in the Holocaust. The Russians called him a “Nazi stooge.”
Lithuania was the first republic to secede from the Soviet Union in 1990 as the communist superpower began to fall apart.
It was not their first parting of the ways. In 1918, Lithuania also gained independence from Russia. But over the years, it was occupied repeatedly — once by Nazi Germany and twice by the Soviet Union.
Now a member of the European Union and of NATO, Lithuania has consistently found itself at odds with its looming neighbor to the east.
Russian propaganda — which Lithuanian lawmakers say is intended to subvert their political system — and recent Russian displays of military might prompted the small nation and its Baltic neighbors to spend more on defense.
Russia’s intervention in nearby Ukraine in 2014 further stoked Lithuania’s fears of the country meddling in its former Soviet territories.
