Lorde stitches poem into Grammys gown as her white rose moment  ‘The apocalypse will blossom’ 
   Lorde emblazoned a poem to the back of her flowing red Grammys gown on Sunday. 
   The artist — who was notably not invited to perform a song from her nominated album "Melodrama" during the ceremony — walked around with a message on her back. 
   The piece of poetry by neo-conceptual artist Jenny Holzer read: "Rejoice! Our times are intolerable. Take courage, for the worst is a harbinger of the best. Only dire circumstance can precipitate the overthrow of oppressors. The old & correct must be laid to waste. Before the just can triumph. Contradiction will be heightened. The reckoning will be hastened by the staging of seed disturbances. The apocalypse will blossom." 
   Lorde, whose real name is Ella Marija Lani Yelich-O'Connor, 21, captioned a photo of the poem saying it was her version of the white rose. 
   "THE APOCALYPSE WILL BLOSSOM — an excerpt from the greatest of all time, jenny holzer," she wrote on Instagram. 
   The New Zealand native was nominated for album of the year for her 2017 hit "Melodrama." She was the only woman nominated in the category, alongside JAY-Z, Kendrick Lamar, Bruno Mars and Childish Gambino. 
   Variety reported that all four men were invited to perform their music on the Sunday stage, but Lorde was not. 
   Her own mother tweeted out a statistic from The New York Times calling out the lack of female representation in the ceremony. 
   "Of the 899 people to be nominated for Grammy awards in the past six years, only nine per cent were women," the post reads. 
   Since the songstress did not get a platform at the awards, she instead put her message on the back of her show-stopping tulle Valentino gown. 
   President of the Recording Academy, Neil Portnow, didn't directly address the reasoning for Lorde not performing. 
   "We have a wealth of wishes every year, and it's hard to have a balanced show and have everybody involved. Every year is different. We can't have a performance from every nominee. We have over 80 categories, and so we have to realize that we've got to create something that has balance, and so on and so forth," he said. "What you saw was our best judgement on how to do that."   
