   Welcome to the machine. 
   "Automating Inequality" addresses the idea that "objective" technology can remove bias and inefficiency in building social safety nets for America's most vulnerable populations. Author Virginia Eubanks instead discovers, in short, that it's GIGO, or "garbage in, garbage out." We're only getting back the quality of what we put into the mechanized form of poverty control. 
   Even before computers, America began systematically imprisoning the have-nots in poorhouses, particularly in the 19th century, to warehouse the "impotent poor," those physically unable to work, while deterring the "able poor" whom such luminaries as John Quincy Adams considered to be shirkers addicted to public relief. 
   Over time, poorhouses gave way to "scientific charities" and then to large public works projects like the New Deal, but the central belief about the lower classes in the United States held firm. Even in the attempts to create aid, the assumption sticks that the poor, and especially poor people of color, somehow deserve their lot in life. This antagonism gets baked into any system, be it the poorhouse or welfare funding, creating cross purposes: to provide relief while discouraging anyone from getting it. 
   Eubanks uses compelling anecdotes of real Americans who try to comply with the attempts to modernize our aging social welfare infrastructure, but get crushed under the so-called wheels of progress. 
   A new mother in Indiana, just months after giving birth, is notified her food stamps and Medicaid benefits are being dropped via a computer generated letter for the vague, all-capped crime of: FAILURE TO COOPERATE IN VERIFYING INCOME. Desperate to only help the deserving poor, the Hoosier state implemented a Kafka-esque automated eligibility system that seemingly looked for ANY reason to prevent citizens from receiving benefits. 
   In Los Angeles, the homeless fill out intrusive and extensive surveys to be entered into a database that ostensibly uses that information to quickly and efficiently house the unhomed. It's just that besides the availability of that data to almost every government agency including the police, the survey counts prison time as one having been housed. This would lower a person's score, making it even more difficult to get the resources they need. 
   For Allegheny County in Pennsylvania, an algorithm from New Zealand controls how family and children's services are meted out in a catch-22 that sees the largely impoverished class of parents desiring to use the services to aid their kids, but knowing that using services can score them on a path to losing them. 
   Eubanks ably demonstrates why everyone should be very, very worried about the present and future of poverty management. Along with the personalized stories, her data exposes the political will, the ease of establishment and the ripe soil for letting cold math take our deepest biases and, in effect, render them into invisible cages for the most vulnerable. 
   Very early in the book, Eubanks recounts talking to a young mother named Dorothy Allen on welfare about the new EBT card technology to help families purchase food back in 2000. 
   "They're great. Except (Social Services) uses them as a tracking device," Allen said. "You should pay attention to what happens to us. You're next." 
   If you feel little compassion or empathy for how rapidly technology is shoving our fellow human beings into the "digital poorhouse," Allen isn't wrong. What's used on one group of marginalized people can easily spread in an Orwellian nightmare that's already partially here. 
   "Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor" is now available in hardcover from St. Martin's Press.    
