Greece Pressured to Improve Migrants’ Living Conditions
ATHENS — Human rights groups stepped up their warnings on Thursday about the living conditions for migrants in Greece after three people died during a recent cold snap on the Aegean island of Lesbos, and as dozens of asylum seekers near Athens threatened to resume a hunger strike if the situation did not improve.
The European Commission criticized Greece last month for an “untenable” situation at its refugee camps amid worsening weather, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Amnesty International and other aid groups have previously expressed alarm about sites across Greece, including those at Elliniko, a camp near Athens, and on Lesbos.
More than a million migrants have passed through Greece in the last two years, and the country has been stretched to its limits in trying to cope simultaneously with the huge influx and an economy that was already teetering.
The approval this week of 3.9 million euros, about $4.15 million, in emergency funds from the European Union will help, but with around 62,000 migrants effectively trapped in Greece at the moment, it will not be nearly enough to resolve the situation.
“The conditions at Elliniko are difficult,” Roland Schoenbauer of the United Nations refugee agency said of the site near Athens that was once home to the city’s international airport. “This is not a camp that was made to house human beings for an extended period.”
The site, along with two adjacent sports venues built for the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, is home to about 1,600 migrants, mostly Afghans, as well as some families from Iran and Pakistan.
Migrants at Elliniko have been living in flimsy tents for more than a year, and a group of around 30 people started refusing food and trying to block deliveries to the site over the weekend to protest living conditions, according to aid workers. They have since started eating again but are threatening an open-ended hunger strike if conditions are not improved.
The Greek migration minister, Ioannis Mouzalas, was confronted by migrants on Monday and briefly prevented from entering Elliniko. While acknowledging the “pain and hardship” they face, Mr. Mouzalas said groups — which he did not identify — were waging a campaign of misinformation and exploiting migrants for their own political ends.
At a news conference on Thursday, Maria Bikaki, a spokeswoman for the left-leaning Coordination for Refugees and Migrants, rejected assertions that the migrants at Elliniko were being manipulated or instigated.
“The only instigation here is the situation,” she said.
Zeinab Ghanbari, a 20-year-old Afghan woman who has been living at Elliniko since she, her husband and her son, now 4, were turned away from Greece’s border with Macedonia a year ago, expressed dismay at her predicament.
“In my country, the Taliban and Al Qaeda kill us in one go with a bullet,” said Mrs. Ghanbari, who is pregnant and would like to go to Sweden. “Here we’re dying gradually over a year. If we knew that Europe, that Greece, is like this, I would have preferred to die in my country.”
The list of migrants’ demands includes a disinfection of the site, where insects and rats are said to be rife; better food and medical services; and a gradual relocation to proper homes rather than tents in disused military barracks and other makeshift quarters.
Kyriakos Mantouvalos, a spokesman for Mr. Mouzalas, said the authorities were doing “everything possible” to help the migrants, including improving access to hot water and better food. He added that the country’s options were limited, and he said that many migrants had rejected offers to move to better-equipped facilities in central Greece.
“They don’t want to go,” Mr. Mantouvalos said. “What can we do?”
Mr. Schoenbauer did, however, report “one positive development.” Two warehouses in norther
