Greeks Approve Deal to Rename Macedonia, in Victory for the West
ATHENS — Overcoming Russian meddling in the Balkans and intensive domestic opposition, Greek lawmakers on Friday cast a wrenching vote to set aside historical antagonisms and recognize the newly renamed nation of North Macedonia, in a rare victory for the European Union and NATO.
The 153 to 146 vote by the Greek Parliament now essentially clears a path for Greece’s northern neighbor Macedonia, under its new name, to join NATO and potentially the European bloc, strengthening the West’s foothold in the Balkans over Moscow’s protests.
Greece had fiercely objected to its neighbor’s use of the name Macedonia, arguing that it appropriated Greek history going back to Alexander the Great and implied territorial ambitions over the northern Greek territory of the same name.
The issue has stirred months of mass demonstrations in Greece, and the decision to support the deal by Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, who has sought to burnish his reputation as a statesman, may yet come back to haunt his government in elections this year. Polls show well over 50 percent of Greeks opposed to the new name, as well as the old one.
After the voting in Parliament began, legislators of the neo-fascist Golden Dawn party interrupted the roll call by shouting “traitors” at leftist lawmakers backing the deal. A small group of demonstrators protested in the rain outside the building.
But more broadly, the seemingly arcane fight over a place name became a test of geopolitical power pitting Europe and the United States against Russia in the perennially unstable Balkans.
The effort by Greece and its neighbor to come to an accommodation was groundbreaking, and it punctured the myth of a mighty Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, hurling thunderbolts down on defenseless Western democracies.
While Mr. Putin may be able to meddle in the West, the outcome underscored that Russia still fails to present an alluring model to compete with the prosperity and democratic values offered by Europe, where Macedonia appears determined to make its future.
In Russia’s effort to sway the Greek vote, it allegedly paid protesters, tried to stoke nationalism on both sides of the border as well as influencing Greek Orthodox priests, and in a by-now familiar tactic, littered the internet with disinformation and propaganda.
But this time, Greek and American officials and observers say, the Russians appear to have overplayed their hand.
“I would call it an unforced error,” said Christopher R. Hill, a former ambassador to Macedonia, who added that Russia upset the Greek government and pushed it closer to the United States and the European Union. For the West, Mr. Hill said, “It is a bright spot.”
