Where Is Rex Tillerson? Top Envoy Keeps Head Down and Travels Light
BONN, Germany — When President Trump met with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel at the White House on Wednesday, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson was conspicuously absent. He was on his first flight overseas as America’s top diplomat, pretty much alone.
Mr. Tillerson, who has no government experience, also missed two other important occasions in Washington this week: a lunch with Russia’s ambassador and Mr. Trump’s meetings with the prime minister of Canada. He has yet to hold a news conference.
Among the eight senior State Department staff members who accompanied Mr. Tillerson on Wednesday to Bonn, five are serving in temporary positions.
Mr. Tillerson was not expected to do much talking, at least publicly, at a Group of 20 foreign ministers’ meeting here on Thursday, which will lay the groundwork for the Group of 20 meeting in July.
The State Department did not invite the customary scrum of reporters, apparently hoping that Mr. Tillerson could continue to keep what has so far been a low profile.
Mr. Tillerson relied on his acting deputy, Thomas A. Shannon Jr., a holdover from the Obama administration, to be his stand-in for the meetings this week with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada and the lunch with ambassador Sergey I. Kislyak of Russia, who is entangled in the growing scandal that cost Michael T. Flynn his job as Mr. Trump’s national security adviser.
Having decided to spend Wednesday flying to Bonn so he could get a good night’s sleep before the Group of 20 meeting, Mr. Tillerson sent Mr. Shannon to Mr. Trump’s meetings with the Israeli prime minister instead.
The State Department has not held its usual daily briefing since Mr. Trump was inaugurated last month, and Mr. Tillerson has said almost nothing publicly since the Senate confirmed him for the job two weeks ago.
Part of the problem may be an extraordinary leadership vacuum at the department. Some appointees to top jobs during the Obama administration resigned or retired, and most of the rest were dismissed by the Trump administration long before there were candidates to replace them.
Mr. Tillerson asked Elliott Abrams, a veteran of the Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush administrations, to become his No. 2, but Mr. Trump overruled him. After interviewing Mr. Abrams in the Oval Office, Mr. Trump decided he could not get beyond Mr. Abrams’s criticism of him during the campaign.
The very public rejection of Mr. Abrams by Mr. Trump sent a chill through the ranks of other Republican foreign policy veterans, many of whom had been equally critical of Mr. Trump during the campaign, if not more so. Finding the dozens of experienced diplomats needed, just as the National Security Council is going through its own uproar, will be challenging.
The official theme of the gathering in Bonn is “Foreign Policy Beyond Crisis Management.” But the crisis engulfing the White House, over contacts between Mr. Trump’s aides and Russian intelligence officials, will probably be difficult for Mr. Tillerson to avoid.
He will meet with Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov of Russia in the first high-level face-to-face engagement between the Trump administration and the Russian government.
Russia’s role in the election of Mr. Trump has become a central concern for Democrats and some Republicans on Capitol Hill after intelligence agencies concluded that Russia used hacking to help Mr. Trump’s campaign and that Trump aides and associates had repeated contacts with senior Russian intelligence officials.
Since the election, the Trump administration has been sending mixed signals on issues important to Russia, particularly the lifting of economic sanctions.
While Mr. Trump has largely defended President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, many of his top aides have been less positive.
Mr. Tillerson, who was awarded Russia’s Order of Friendship as chief executive of Exxon Mobil, made critical comments about Russia in his confirmation hearings, and Pentagon officials recently accused Russia of violating a landmark arms control treaty.
Nikki R. Haley, the new American ambassador to the United Nations, who nominally reports to Mr. Tillerson, condemned Russia this month for its “aggressive actions” in eastern Ukraine and made it clear that sanctions imposed on Russia would remain in place.
Mr. Tillerson will also be meeting in Bonn with the foreign ministers of Britain, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, South Korea, Argentina, Brazil and Italy. Meetings are planned to discuss the conflicts in Yemen and Syria.
But then, instead of joining many of his counterparts as they head to the nearby Munich Security Conference, an important annual gathering focused on security policy that Defense Secretary Jim Mattis is also expected to attend, Mr. Tillerson will go home Friday.
