SYDNEY, Australia — The Australian government strongly rebuked Beijing on Friday for detaining one of its citizens, a writer who has called for liberalization in China, expressing concern over his welfare and calling for his release.
Australia was “deeply disappointed” to learn that Yang Hengjun, a Chinese-born Australian who has been in custody since January, had been placed in criminal detention, Marise Payne, the country’s foreign minister, said in a statement.
“We have asked for clarification regarding the reasons for Dr. Yang’s detention,” she said. “If he is being detained for his political views, then he should be released.”
The confrontation comes at a time of political tension between the two countries, with Australia taking steps to guard against foreign interference, even as it has leaned on China as a major trading partner. Last year, it banned the Chinese tech giant Huawei from building a 5G wireless network, over potential cyberespionage concerns.
Officials from the Australian Embassy have visited Mr. Yang six times, most recently on June 27, and the government has appealed to China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, for Mr. Yang to be granted access to his lawyers. “This has not occurred,” the statement said.
The Beijing Municipal Bureau of State Security said in January that it had detained Mr. Yang for “endangering national security.”
His wife, Yuan Xiaoliang, received a notice this week that he had been put under criminal detention on Wednesday and was now held in a state security detention center in Beijing. Previously, Mr. Yang had been held under murkier detention powers that left it unclear where he was being held.
Mr. Yang’s Chinese lawyer, Mo Shaoping, said the formal detention meant that the state security bureau could keep holding Mr. Yang for another 37 days from the date of the notice while it continued investigating him. By the end of that time, they must decide whether to go to a prosecutor to seek Mr. Yang’s formal arrest, which would move the case to the next stage of investigation, Mr. Mo said by telephone from Beijing.
For now, Mr. Yang is still being held “on suspicion of endangering state security,” an umbrella accusation that can cover crimes such as espionage or stealing state secrets, Mr. Mo said.
Mr. Yang worked for the Chinese Foreign Ministry before migrating to Australia, where he became a citizen in 2002.
He wrote extensively on Chinese affairs, developing a large following in China on his blog and on social media, and he has also penned spy novels. He was widely regarded as an independent voice, but he kept his criticism muted and his critics said he took care not to antagonize the Chinese government.
Mr. Yang was detained in January after he traveled to the city of Guangzhou from New York, where had spent the past two years as a visiting scholar at Columbia University. Before he could catch a connecting flight to Shanghai with his wife and daughter, officers took him into custody.
Ms. Payne said the Australian government had regularly raised concerns with senior Chinese officials about the reasons for Mr. Yang’s detention and the conditions in which he was being held.
“We will continue to press Chinese authorities for fair and humane treatment, in accordance with international norms,” she said.
