Instagram begins to hide likes in international test 
   Instagram users, you may not like this. 
   The company said Wednesday it’s developing its test to conceal “likes” to more countries, including Italy, Japan, Ireland, Australia, New Zealand and Brazil. 
   Instagram, whose parent company is Facebook, started testing the concept in May in Canada in an effort to reduce the pressure to garner as much likes on the social media platform. The likes, which appear as hearts on Instagram, are normally used to connote a level of popularity. 
   Though the test removes the total number of likes on posts, the owner of the account will still be able to see them. The owner’s followers, however, will not be able to see the amount. Likes will no longer appear on the main feed, profiles or permalink pages. 
   “We are testing this because we want your followers to focus on the photos and videos you share, not how many likes they get,” an Instagram spokesperson said. 
   Needless to say, many users were unhappy with the decision and took to social media to express their thoughts. Some are even expressing all they want is their feed to go back to chronological order again, a change they implemented a few years ago. 
   According to a 2017 report by the Royal Society for Public Health in the U.K., Instagram is the most damaging social media application for young people’s mental well-being. Receiving an insufficient amount of likes can actually affect some users’ self-esteem. 
   “As we navigate these new digital spaces that have so much to offer, we must be having a conversation about how it can affect our mental health,” professional health YouTuber Laci Green said in the report. “Because platforms like Instagram and Facebook present highly curated versions of the people we know and the world around us, it is easy for our perspective of reality to become distorted.” 
   Though many are deriding the application for concealing the likes, some are very much behind the decision. 
   “Please add this in the U.S.,” one user replied in the thread. 
   “Honestly, this is actually pretty good. Puts more focus on the content and not how many likes a picture has," another user commented. "This really helps those that create stuff with not as many followers as random ‘stars.' This will also force people to be more creative, so overall a great implementation.” 
   However, Instagram’s likes test won’t solve all the other potential factors that could be detrimental to our mental health, including feeling left out, bullying or thinking others’ lives are better than their own, according to experts who spoke to CNN Business. 
   “The biggest impact of Instagram is the content,” Renee Engeln, a psychology professor at Northwestern University, told CNN Business. “The exposure to this constant stream of perfected images is what seems to hurt psychologically.” 
   Earlier this month, the company announced a new tool that utilizes artificial intelligence to let users know when a comment could be offensive before it’s posted. Additionally, Instagram is introducing a “Restrict” mode, a concept to confront bullies. When you restrict another, the comments on your posts from said person can only be seen by them, and not other users. Restricted users will also be unable to see if the user is currently on the application or if they’ve seen their direct messages.   
