245 Migrants Feared Dead in Mediterranean Shipwrecks
LONDON — Almost two shiploads of migrants, 245 in total, were feared dead in wrecks in the Mediterranean Sea, United Nations officials said on Tuesday. The death toll represents a major increase in an already grim tally this year.
More than 1,300 people are now estimated to have died so far this year while trying to cross the Mediterranean to Europe, most while trying to reach Italy from Libya or Tunisia, according to the International Organization for Migration. Last year, 5,098 people died that way.
The two recent shipwrecks occurred on Friday and Sunday, though details about the extent of the loss of life were not released until Tuesday.
On Friday night, a rubber dinghy sank after several hours at sea, with 132 people on board. Of those, 50 were rescued and taken on Sunday to Pozzallo, Sicily; an additional 82 were believed to have died.
On Sunday, another shipwreck was reported, this one off the coast of Libya. The International Medical Corps, which works with the United Nations refugee agency, reported that one woman and six men had been rescued by the Libyan Coast Guard, but that 163 people were feared dead.
Tens of thousands of people — 43,000 so far this year — continue to brave treacherous waters to try to reach Italy. It has become the major route for people fleeing war and poverty in North or West Africa, and in some cases farther east.
In contrast, the flow of migrants across the Aegean Sea, from Turkey to Greece, has significantly slowed — though not entirely stopped — since Turkey and the European Union reached a deal in March 2016 to try to contain it.
The United Nations refugee agency, in a statement on Tuesday, described “an urgent need to address the root causes which lead people to move, as well as to offer credible alternatives to these dangerous crossings for people in need of international protection, including accessible and safe ways to reach Europe such as family reunification, relocation and resettlement.”
Smugglers based in Libya have lured migrants to pay exorbitant sums for risky voyages at sea. The problem is so uncontrolled that the prosecutor at the International Criminal Court, which looks into crimes against humanity, told the United Nations Security Council on Monday that she was considering an investigation.
“My office continues to collect and analyze information relating to serious and widespread crimes allegedly committed against migrants attempting to transit through Libya,” said the prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda.
“I’m similarly dismayed by credible accounts that Libya has become a marketplace for the trafficking of human beings,” she said.
Libya has been in varying states of disarray since the dictator Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi was overthrown in 2011. Ms. Bensouda said that Libya was at risk of descending into chaos, which could lead to further human rights abuses.
The Italian authorities have generally been credited with maintaining a fine balance: rescuing migrants at risk of drowning in their waters, while discouraging people to take to the waters. On Monday, the magazine L’Espresso released audio recordings that it said showed Italian officials telling the captain of a sinking fishing boat to “call Malta” in October 2013. The magazine said that 268 people died, including 60 children.
The Italian government has not confirmed the report. But shortly after that wreck, and after the shipwreck that took over 360 lives just off the Italian island of Lampedusa the week before, Italy began a marine rescue program, called Mare Nostrum, that ultimately rescued thousands of people. The European Union now runs a similar program.
