Jason Vargas turns in best start of season as Mets take down Braves to 'We want David' chants
   “We want David” chants broke out at Citi Field again on Thursday, but Mets fans will have to wait at least another day before the captain makes his triumphant return. 
   Wright will start Saturday against the Marlins for what will be his final game, thought the Mets have left open the possibility of inserting him into an outing before then as a pinch-hitter. 
   Meanwhile, Jason Vargas turned in by far his best start since joining the Mets in a 4-1 win over the playoff-bound Braves. 
   Vargas (7-9) tossed seven shutout innings in his best start of the season for the Mets. 
   Vargas gave up three hits, walked none and struck out six, pitching in light rain in the later innings. The 35-year-old lefty tied for the major league lead with 18 wins last season with Kansas City but struggled after signing a $16 million, two-year deal with the Mets. 
   "Good job," Mets manager Mickey Callaway said. "He finished the season strong for us." 
   The Mets got on Julio Teheran early, as the Braves starter gave up a leadoff double to Brandon Nimmo in the first and a home run to Kevin Plawecki in the fourth. 
   Pinch-hitter Devin Mesoraco connected for a three-run homer off Brad Brach in the seventh that made it 4-0. 
   Teheran (9-9) allowed one run, struck out five and walked two, exciting with a 1-0 deficit. His final regular-season start came exactly a week before the Braves are set to begin the postseason. 
   The Braves beat the Mets in the opener of this three-game series for their sixth straight win. But Mets starters Noah Syndergaard, Jacob deGrom and Vargas combined for 21 scoreless innings in the set, and New York finished 6-13 against Atlanta this year. 
   Robert Gsellman worked the ninth for his 13th save. He struck out Freeman with two on to end it. 
   The 35-year-old team captain left a spirited reminder of his days in the clubhouse before the game. A bottle of tequila was put in each teammate's locker, with his No. 5 and the message, "Thanks for the memories." 
   -- With News Wire Services   
