   Just call him CyGrom. 
   And to the NL Cy Young doubters: Take that. 
   Jacob deGrom wiped away the one counter-argument to him winning the prestigious pitching award by registering his 10th win of the season Wednesday night, pushing him over the .500 mark (nine losses) and into the double-digit threshold. 
   The final line: 8 IP, 2 H, 0 R, 0 BB, 10 K in a 3-0 win over the Braves. 
   Again — how could the Mets ace not win the NL Cy Young? 
   “That’s not up to me decide,” deGrom told SNY with a wide smile afterward. “That’s out of my hands.” 
   Oh, and deGrom also tallied his 1,000th career strikeout. 
   "I had the goal to get to that tonight,” deGrom told reporters. “It was a lot cooler to get my 1,000th strikeout on my last pitch of the year than my first batter next year." 
   Let the accolades continue. 
   He retired the final 20 hitters he faced after allowing a single to Johan Camargo in the second inning. 
   DeGrom gave up no more than three runs in his last 29 starts to extend his own single-season record. The All-Star ace also matched the overall mark set by Jake Arrieta in 2015-16. 
   He received numerous ovations from the crowd of 23,205, even when he struck out in the seventh. By the eighth, the crowd was hanging on every pitch and, after he fanned Tyler Flowers for the third time, the fans began "MVP" chants. 
   As the Mets batted in the eighth, the crowd began chanting "We Want Jake" and booed when Seth Lugo entered. Lugo finished off deGrom's latest gem by tossing a scoreless ninth for his third save. 
   DeGrom also won for the first time in six starts against Atlanta this year. He allowed four runs in 41 innings against the Braves. 
   "For me it's just watching a dominant starter and the best pitcher in baseball every five days," Mets manager Mickey Callaway said. 
   Dominic Smith drove in the first run with an RBI single in the sixth off Luke Jackson (1-2). 
   Smith's hit was enough for deGrom, who allowed one or no runs in 18 of 32 starts this year, the most in the National League. 
   Michael Conforto hit his career-high 28th homer in the eighth with a long drive off Kyle Wright. Two batters later Smith homered to make it 3-0. 
   Ozzie Virgil Sr. was an honorary coach and exchanged lineup cards. Virgil, 86, was the first Dominican-born player in the major leagues when he made his debut for the New York Giants in 1956. During an eight-year career with the Giants in New York and San Francisco, Detroit, the Kansas City Athletics, Baltimore and Pittsburgh, Virgil appeared at catcher, third base and outfield. He currently serves as a special catching instructor for New York's teams in the Dominican Summer League and has spent the last 11 seasons doing so. 
   -- With News Wire Services   
