RIO DE JANEIRO — In cellphone pictures and selfies with friends, Maria Eduarda da Conceição was a joker, a happy teenager, making faces in the schoolyard and throwing poses in her school uniform of white T-shirt and blue shorts.
But last week, when the 13-year-old who loved playing basketball and dreamed of turning professional was playing in the same schoolyard in the Fazenda Botafogo favela, shortly after the photos were taken, a gun battle between the police and drug gang members erupted. She ran inside the school, only to be felled by three shots that left her dead and bleeding on the floor.
Her sister Beatriz da Costa, 21, heard the gunfire. “I went into the school and stayed there with her, lying on the floor, crying,” Ms. da Costa said in a phone interview.
It was one more tragic death in this city, adding to a spike in the numbers of people killed during police operations in Rio since last year. And it seems to have increased a sense that violence — particularly killings involving the police — is spinning out of control just seven months after the city hosted the Olympics.
Cellphone video shot during the gun battle showed two police officers approaching two men lying on the ground outside the school, picking up a rifle and shooting them dead. Both officers have been arrested.
The killing generated a flood of shocked headlines and reactions in a city that has endured tragedies like this before. The city’s education secretary, César Benjamin, wrote on his Facebook page that there was “no doubt” the shots that killed Maria Eduarda had been fired by officers aiming at two armed men. Residents of nearby communities called for an end to military-style police operations.
“These operations don’t result in anything, just violence,” said Valdinei Martins, 44, a resident of the neighboring Acari favela whose brother João was killed by a stray bullet in 2014. “There is no intelligence.”
Killings as a result of “opposition to police intervention” across Rio de Janeiro State rose from 49 in February 2016 to 84 this February — a 71 percent increase, according to government reports. The 41st police battalion responsible for policing Fazenda Botafogo and surrounding areas, far from Rio’s picturesque beaches, proved even more lethal. In January and February, 36 people were killed during actions by officers from that battalion, compared with six during the same period last year, according to the same reports.
In shootings involving the police, officers often escape punishment, as a 2016 report by the advocacy group Human Rights Watch revealed. Officers also suffer high homicide rates themselves.
The Rio police declined to answer questions about Maria Eduarda’s death. In an emailed statement, they said officers had been sent “to intervene in an action by criminals” and that “there was a confrontation.” Maria Eduarda’s death is being investigated, the statement said, and the two officers shown in the video are in custody and their case being investigated by internal affairs.
The deaths also come as Rio struggles with financial and political crises. Brazil is undergoing its worst recession on record, with 13 million people unemployed and an economy that contracted 3.6 percent last year. The state government in Rio is broke, struggling to pay police salaries and reeling from the jailing of a former governor, Sérgio Cabral, accused of running a multimillion-dollar graft network that took bribes from Olympic and other public works projects.
Although policing is a state government responsibility, the current governor, Luiz de Souza, formerly Mr. Cabral’s deputy governor, has yet to comment on the killings but plans to meet with Maria Eduarda’s family this week.
Antônio Costa, founder of River of Peace, an anti-violence group, said Mr. de Souza’s silence was symptomatic of a city many feel is descending into chaos.
“The State of Rio has no leader,” he said. “There is no one in command, there is a complete loss of credibility,” he said.
Maria Eduarda’s brother Uidson Ferreira, a 32-year-old martial arts instructor, said his sister’s death showed how the police were woefully unprepared to deal with armed confrontation in densely populated areas. “With this crisis, with these 13 million unemployed, the violence has been very explicit,” he said in a phone interview. “What is happening is a lack of preparation of the whole hierarchy of the government. This comes from above, and the poor class always pays the bill.”
“The family has totally fallen apart psychologically,” he added, his voice shaking with tears. “It is like we are going crazy.”
Bruna Aguiar, 25, a university student and resident of Acari, a favela just across the subway line from Fazenda Botafogo, said the police would have thought more carefully before opening fire near a school in a middle-class area. Outside Rio’s favelas, she said, people avoid subjects like police killings and poverty.
“If you talk about it, you touch on an open wound,” Ms. Aguiar said.
They know all about stray bullets in Acari, which is also policed by the 41st battalion. Ms. Aguiar is part of a local collective that has denounced regular police invasions it says causes terror among residents.
On Sunday afternoon, the favela hummed with life. Beeping motorbikes zipped down its winding lanes, where residents sat out on plastic chairs and young men with rifles from its dominant drug gang, the Third Pure Command, guarded strategic corners.
One with a radio pointed to the rooftop from which he said the police had shot a fellow gang member dead the previous week. As darkness fell, another wearing an earpiece cradled a machine gun and moved to music booming from a nearby bar.
Priscilla Cabral, 32, a shop assistant, showed the bullet holes left in her front door after one police operation; her daughter Angelina, 8, had tried to cover them up with chewing gum. Ms. Cabral had pulled her dozing son Robert, 15, off the sofa seconds before another bullet thudded into the wall behind him.
She said her studious daughter got upset when gun battles stopped her from going to school.
“She said to me: ‘Take me out of here. I can’t stand it anymore,’ ” Ms. Cabral said.
