ATOP MOUNT FUJI, Japan — Search for “Top of Mt. Fuji” on Instagram, and you’ll discover thousands of posts documenting the hikers who have made it here to the summit of Japan’s best-known volcano.
But for many trekkers, sharing photographs of their feat on social media is way too new school.
Instead, they would rather send an old-fashioned piece of snail mail from the tiny post office atop Mount Fuji, one of the few places in Japan where a postmark is still more coveted than another “like” on Instagram or Facebook.
“We thought it would have more meaning,” Toshiyuki Kasahara, 43, said of the postcards that he and his two sons, Yushun, 8, and Seijin, 6, deposited in the mailbox to send home after arriving on the summit last month. “It’s a substantial record that they can keep.”
Mount Fuji — or “Fuji-san” in Japanese — is considered sacred in Japan, and its snow-capped visage has been memorialized in countless artworks, making it an international symbol of the country.
About 300,000 people climb it each year, including school groups, corporate teams and tourists from around the globe. Making it to the top of Japan’s highest mountain takes a vigorous four- to six-hour hike, but it does not require much special equipment or skill.
For those who reach the summit, one reward is the view: a breathtaking sweep of the mountain and the clouds skittering above; many climbers time their arrival to coincide with the sunrise.
The post office atop Mount Fuji is also a popular attraction for many summiteers, and close to 18,000 people visited it last summer, sending nearly 97,000 pieces of mail. At a time when many post offices across Japan are experiencing steep declines in mail volume, the mountain’s outpost thrives.
But transporting all that mail down the 12,388-foot peak takes considerable effort, even in the absence of rain, sleet or snow. That’s where the bulldozer comes in — or, technically speaking, a close cousin of one.
Two or three days a week during the 40-day span of the summer hiking season that ends in August, a weather-beaten crawler tractor (a bulldozer minus the blade in front) trundles up the 2.8 mile Fujinomiya trail to collect crates of postcards and letters. After descending 4,500 feet in altitude, the tractor hands off the mail to a regular postal van.
Officials at Japan Post, which runs more than 24,000 post offices across the country, said the Mount Fuji branch collected about 12.1 million yen, or nearly $109,000, in revenue last year, but declined to say how much it costs to service this vertiginous route.
With digital messages and social media supplanting regular mail, the postal unit of Japan Post lost nearly ¥385 billion, or about $3.5 billion, last year. (The banking and insurance divisions were profitable.)
Motohiko Matsumi, postmaster of the Mount Fuji branch, said as long as hikers climbed the mountain, the postal service would want to keep open its most famous, and highest elevation, branch.
“The people who climb Fuji-san want to make a special memory,” Mr. Matsumi said. “So we are not so much worried about this particular post office.”
To experience firsthand what’s involved in delivering mail from the summit, I climbed aboard the tractor last month for the bone clattering four-hour round trip up and down the mountain. The company that operates the vehicle, Fuji Concrete Service, not only collects the mail, but also delivers food and drinks six days a week to the huts along the path where hikers stop for meals, bathroom breaks and naps.
