SÃO PAULO, Brazil — The Brazilian police on Friday arrested eight employees of the giant mining company Vale on suspicion of first-degree murder as part of a criminal investigation into a dam rupture that killed over 160 people.
The dam, filled with mining waste and sludge, burst three weeks ago, sending a tidal wave of mud crashing down on the company cafeteria at a mining complex in Brumadinho in southeastern Brazil. The torrent continued downhill, slamming into homes and contaminating rivers. At least 166 people were killed and 147 remain missing.
The eight people arrested were “fully aware of the instable situation of the dam,” the judge, Rodrigo Heleno Chaves, said in the arrest warrant, citing evidence collected over the last three weeks.
He said a “drastic variation” that was recorded in monitoring instruments just days before the collapse, along with anomalies registered since mid-2018, should have prompted an immediate evacuation.
The defendants will be held for up to 30 days as the criminal investigation continues and prosecutors decide what charges to formally file, he said.
The police also carried out 14 search and seizure warrants at Vale offices and at the offices of four employees of the Brazilian subsidiary of TÜV Süd, a German industrial testing company, which inspected the Brumadinho dam twice last year, most recently in September.
Vale said in a statement on Friday that it was fully cooperating with the authorities, and that it would “continue to support the investigations in order to determine the facts.”
TÜV Süd said it would not comment on the investigation.
In emails included in the arrest warrant, one TÜV Süd engineer said that inspections indicated that the dam was at risk of liquefaction — when the solid tailings abruptly become a murky liquid.
The engineer, Makoto Namba, wrote that the analysis wasn’t complete, “but, as always, Vale is going to push us to the wall.”
In Brazil, independent auditors verify the safety of dams through regular inspections and analysis of written records. But according to experts, the certification process is flawed because the mining companies select and pay the auditor — creating a conflict of interest — and provide all the documentation that inspectors base their analyses on.
In the weeks since the latest tragedy, a series of documents have emerged that show Vale shrugged off warning signs at the dam, which was built using an inherently risky “upstream” method, and successfully lobbied to fast-track an expansion plan at the mining complex.
When the dam broke, no alarms or sirens sounded to warn workers and communities downstream. Vale said the rupture had happened too quickly to trigger the alarm system.
Vale has since announced it is shutting down its 10 remaining upstream dams and suspending production at the mining compounds where they stand until the dams have been decommissioned.
