Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
The crowd that gathered in Sydney’s Prince Alfred Park yesterday expected to celebrate, and they did — dancing and cheering when results of the same-sex marriage survey showed that a majority of Australians supported the argument for marriage equality.
But if the high turnout and victory showed the health of Australia’s democracy, as many people said it did, there were also quite a few arguing that the survey itself pointed to the country’s biggest problem: a divided, out-of-touch legislature that often lags behind other countries and its own constituents on the important issues of the day.
This view arose quickly in many of our interviews over the past few months on the issue, and I included that point — among others — in the analysis piece published today that aims to step back and assess what Australia has learned about itself through this lengthy and challenging process.
But as is often the case, there was nowhere near enough room to include all the insightful and interesting comments we collected on the issue, even just this week. So rather than let it all go to waste, I figured I’d share a few outtakes here.
Go read today’s article for a globally minded take on the survey results. If you get the urge, and I hope you do, tell me what you think Australia has discovered about its politics and its sense of self through all of this at nytaustralia@nytimes.com and in our subscriber Facebook group.
Now here are a few of those outtakes, followed by a roundup of other Timesian work and a recommendation.
An Ugly Process
— Paulo Corte-Real, a Portuguese activist and economist who helped lead Portugal to approve same-sex marriage in 2009
A Weaker Right?
— Peter Lewis, progressive pollster with Essential Media Communications, a public affairs and research company
Love and ‘No’
— Rob Assaf, 21, university student and “no” voter
Gay and Opposed to Marriage
— Ben Rogers, 41, Wollongong
A Painful Process
— Rohan Spong, a gay documentary filmmaker, whose film “All The Way Through Evening” is returning to Australian screens this month
______
We’ve been busy covering the results of the postal survey — but we’re multitaskers. Don’t miss this deep dive on the ways that Chinese nationalism and academics have been clashing in Australian universities.
Besha Rodell’s latest restaurant review will make you hungry and teach you a thing or two about the power of late-night Korean food in Melbourne. I’ll also have a major feature from my trip to Manus Island running in the next few days. I may send it to all of you as an Australia Letter “extra.”
______
The debate over taxing sugary drinks has turned into a ferocious global policy brawl. In Colombia, proponents faced intimidation and censorship.
Dr. Esperanza Cerón, director of a group that campaigned for a tax on sugary drinks, experienced it firsthand. When she spoke up, Colombia’s consumer protection agency barred her from talking about the link between sugar and obesity.
It’s the latest installment of The New York Times’s Planet Fat series … and there may be an Australian piece on the way.
______
• Why Men Aren’t Funny lays out why Louis C.K.’s downfall is a notable step in a patriarchal industry.
• From Journalist to Hostage tells the story of Michael Scott Moore, a journalist who was kidnapped by Somali pirates, to ask: Who pays the price if countries refuse to pay ransoms?
• Explaining Our Bodies, Finding Ourselves captures two poets, weary of explaining their disabilities to the world, finding solace in each other.
______
You care about the planet, right? I bet you wade through as much climate coverage as you can, but you could probably use a smart guide or two to help you make sense of it all.
Good news. We’ve got a new newsletter for you. It’s called Climate Fwd: (with the colon) and it’s anchored by Lisa Friedman and Brad Plumer, two writers for The New York Times covering climate change.
“It’s a giant topic that touches on everything from science to global politics to energy markets to the way we eat and drive and plan our cities,” they write in their introduction. “Our hope here is to make climate issues more accessible, bit by bit.”
