BUENOS AIRES — The disappearance of an indigenous rights activist in Argentina spurred violent clashes between demonstrators and the police on Friday and has raised dark memories of forced disappearances during the country’s dictatorship.
Relatives and supporters say the activist, Santiago Maldonado, was last seen during a confrontation on Aug. 1 between border police officers and supporters of a Mapuche indigenous community that was being displaced from an area in the Patagonia region that belongs to Benetton, the clothing company.
Family members said they feared that the security forces might have taken Mr. Maldonado into custody without disclosing his fate or whereabouts. The authorities say there is no evidence of foul play.
But the possibility that the government has secretly taken Mr. Maldonado, 28, into custody has transfixed and angered many Argentines, for whom the memory of mass disappearances and killings during the 1976-83 dictatorship remains fresh.
“We can’t turn a blind eye to a forced disappearance that took place as part of a repressive action by law enforcement,” said Marta López, 68, a doctor who joined tens of thousands around the Plaza de Mayo in Buenos Aires on Friday with signs asking, “Where is Santiago Maldonado?”
That question has reverberated across the country and on social media this week. Argentines have chimed in with Facebook and Twitter posts that provide their location and ask: “But where is Santiago Maldonado?”
The suspected involvement of the security forces drove many to protest. The clashes left 23 people injured, according to La Nación newspaper. Thirty people were still being detained on Saturday morning, according to the state-run Télam news agency.
Protesters charged that the government appears to be more concerned with defending the officers who took part in the eviction of the activists blocking a road the day Mr. Maldonado vanished than finding out what happened to him.
“We need a serious investigation,” said Mariano Bejer, 37, who was carrying his 2-year-old son, Santiago, on his shoulders during the protest. “All we want are some answers.”
The case has also become a flash point in the campaign for the coming legislative election, which pits the ruling party of President Mauricio Macri against that of the former President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who is running for a Senate seat and has aspirations to stymie the president’s agenda.
Mrs. Kirchner, a polarizing but still widely popular figure, has portrayed Mr. Maldonado’s case as emblematic of a government that is callous toward the poor and other marginalized Argentines. She attended a Mass on Friday in Mr. Maldonado’s honor at a church in Buenos Aires Province.
Sergio Maldonado, the brother of the missing activist, addressed the throngs who had gathered at the Plaza de Mayo in the capital.
“The state continues to deny his disappearance, and it seems like it denies his mere existence,” Mr. Maldonado said. He called for the resignation of the security minister, Patricia Bullrich, drawing sustained jeers from the crowd and chants of “Oust her.”
Santiago Maldonado’s case is being investigated as a forced disappearance, but the prosecutor in charge of the investigation has said no evidence has emerged to date that security forces took him into custody.
Ms. Bullrich and other senior officials have said that the government is diligently searching for Mr. Maldonado, although she has questioned whether he was even present at the protest.
Human rights groups have called on the Argentine government to conduct an independent investigation. Last month, the United Nations Committee on Enforced Disappearances urged the authorities to adopt an “integral and exhaustive strategy for the search and location” of Mr. Maldonado.
“When someone goes missing, no matter under which circumstances, time is of the essence,” José Miguel Vivanco, the executive director of the Americas Division at Human Rights Watch, said in a statement last month.
“This is all the more important when the person may have been forcibly disappeared by security forces.”
Mr. Macri’s chief of staff, Marcos Peña, called for restraint after Friday’s clashes. “Starting with President Mauricio Macri and the entire team, the priority is that Santiago Maldonado turn up alive,” he told reporters. 
Mr. Maldonado was reportedly among a group of activists who blocked a road in the southern province of Chubut to demand the release of the Mapuche leader Facundo Jones Huala, who is wanted in Chile on terrorism charges.
The sit-in sparked clashes in an area owned by Benetton. Mapuche activists have contended for years that part of the territory is rightfully theirs.
