Video of Fatally Wounded Teenager Sparks Palestinian Rage
JERUSALEM — A Palestinian teenager was lying motionless on the ground in an olive grove after being shot — fatally, it would turn out — by Israeli security forces.
It started as a routine clash: Israeli forces arrived on Monday afternoon in military jeeps at Tekoa, a Palestinian village in the Bethlehem district of the occupied West Bank, and were confronted by residents hurling stones. There was nothing particularly remarkable about the clash that led to the death of the teenager, Qusai Al-Amour, 18.
But graphic video footage emerged showing what happened next. Israeli Border Police officers ran up to Mr. Amour, grabbed him by the arms and legs and dragged him roughly for about 50 seconds back to the jeeps, his body limp and his head bouncing and hitting the ground.
Mr. Amour was given emergency treatment by army medics, the military said, but was soon declared dead. The video also showed a woman and a man who approached the jeeps quickly turning and limping away, apparently having been hit in the legs, perhaps by rubber-coated bullets. The footage was shown on Palestinian television and spread quickly on Palestinian social networks, stoking popular outrage.
“Qusai was shot with six bullets during these clashes, four times in the chest and one bullet in each of his legs,” Yousef Al-Amour, the teenager’s uncle, said on Tuesday. The soldiers then carried him off “and started throwing his body around as if he wasn’t a human being,” his uncle said, speaking by telephone from the wake in Tekoa, hours after his nephew’s funeral.
The Palestinian Authority’s governor of the Bethlehem district, speaking on Palestinian radio, described the teenager’s death as an “execution.”
The Israeli military said in a statement that “hundreds of violent rioters” had confronted the security forces, who fired on and wounded “a main violent instigator.” In the process of evacuating him, the military said, the forces came under a barrage of rocks, which caused them to remove him hastily. The military added that the episode was under review.
The West Bank has long been volatile, but a recent increase in Palestinian attacks against Israelis and accusations of excessive use of force by Israeli soldiers have added to the tensions. An Israeli soldier was recently convicted in a military court of manslaughter after fatally shooting a wounded and subdued Palestinian assailant in the head.
Another Palestinian man was fatally shot by Israeli forces on Tuesday after he tried to stab a soldier at a military checkpoint elsewhere in the West Bank, the army said.
Hisham Abu Shaqrah, a Palestinian photojournalist working for Anadolu, the Turkish news agency, filmed the video in Tekoa. Mr. Abu Shaqrah told Wafa, the official Palestinian news agency, that he had initially considered running to help the wounded teenager. Once the soldiers arrived, he said, he began to document the scene instead. “The video showed the crime in all its details,” he said.
By Tuesday night, the video posted to Mr. Abu Shaqrah’s Facebook page had more than 30,000 views and had been shared nearly 500 times.
Yousef Al-Amour, the dead teenager’s uncle, who works in the governor’s office, said Israeli forces frequently raided Tekoa, which is near Israeli settlements, and detained youths for a few days of interrogation. He described Qusai, a high school student, as a popular and talented soccer player who played for local teams and was always well groomed, with “the latest haircut” kept in place with copious amounts of shiny gel.
