TORONTO — They were students and retirees, sports fans and lovers of animals. One was a chef, another an account executive, a third a school nutrition worker. Four were 80 or older, and two were foreigners.
And perhaps most striking, women accounted for eight of the 10 people killed in the April 21 rampage by the driver of a rental van. Investigators are looking into the driver’s motives, and whether he may have singled out women.
Ontario officials have now identified all of the victims. Here are brief profiles based on news and social media accounts.
Ms. D’Amico, 30, worked at the Canadian head office of Invesco, an investment management company based in Atlanta. Her family described her in a statement as the “definition of altruism.”
“She wouldn’t stop until she went the extra mile for others,” her family said.
Since the age of 12, Ms. D’Amico volunteered at the Rogers Cup, a professional tennis tournament played in Montreal and Toronto. Gavin Ziv, an executive with Tennis Canada, the sport’s governing body, told C.B.C. Radio that Ms. D’Amico started out with the tournament as a ball girl.
At the time of her death, she was managing a group of about 200 volunteers.
Ms. Sewell, 80, was also a sports fan, her grandson Elwood Delaney told the CBC.
“She loved her Maple Leafs; she loved her Blue Jays,” Mr. Delaney said referring to Toronto’s hockey and baseball teams. “I don’t think she ever missed a Blue Jays game.”
Mr. Delaney said Ms. Sewell, who had worked at Sears Canada, died while going to the bank. News of her death, he said, had produced a mix of “pure anger and then sadness” in him.
Munair Najjar, 85, a Jordanian citizen, was visiting family in Toronto along with his wife, Lillian, according to news reports.
Mr. Najjar, who had two children and three grandchildren in Toronto, was known as an active and friendly neighbor back in Jordan.
He and his wife are seen together in numerous Facebook photos, The Toronto Star said, noting that one of the last photos of them showed Lillian with her arm wrapped around her husband.
Ms. Amarasingha, 45, a native of Sri Lanka, had worked as a nutrition staff member at a number of schools in Toronto over the past three years. She had just completed her first day at a new school, the Toronto District School Board said in a statement.
The youth council at the Toronto Mahavihara Buddhist Meditation Centre, where Ms. Amarasingha was a member, said in an online post that she was the single mother of a 7-year-old son, Diyon.
The group set up a GoFundMe campaign for the boy, which a week after the attack had raised over 310,000 Canadian dollars. The child, the group said, has no other family in Canada.
Mr. Kang, 45, who was known as Eddie, worked as a chef at the downtown location of Copacabana, a chain of Brazilian steakhouses.
“He has a passion for food,” Armando Sandoval, a co-worker told Global News, a Canadian television network. “I feel too many things, I’m still in shock.”
Ms. Bradden, 33, was an account executive for Gartner, a research company with offices in Toronto.
“Andrea’s joyful energy brought smiles, happiness and laughter to everyone who was privileged to work with her and call her a friend,” Alex Falkingham, a Gartner Canada executive said on a company blog, according to The Caledon Enterprise.
Ms. Brady, 83, was known for her seamstress skills and sold Avon products for many years, according to a death notice posted online.
“She was still driving and actively delivering Avon orders,” a friend, Feanny Xu, told   The Toronto Star. She said Ms. Brady had been selling for the company for 45 years.
Ms. Brady had two daughters, five grandchildren and one great-grandchild. A woman offering condolences on the obituary site said, “You were the best neighbor” and called Ms. Brady “one of the sweetest” and most down-to-earth people she had ever known.
Ms. Chung, 22, was a molecular biology student at the University of Toronto and a member of the Korean Students’ Association, The Toronto Star reported.
“There wasn’t a single person who didn’t get along with her. She was an amazing, well-rounded person,” a high school friend said in a Facebook message.
Ms. Forsyth, 94, had stopped to feed the birds and squirrels during one of her frequent walks when she was killed. The Toronto Star, calling her a “force of nature,” said she still lived independently and was constantly wearing down the wheels on her walker.
“I had to change them twice!” her nephew Rob Forsyth told the newspaper. “She wore them down to the metal.”
It said Ms. Forsyth, known as Betty, was a “Star Trek” and “Downton Abbey” fan with an “exceptional memory,” according to friends and relatives.
Ms. Kim, 22, was a native of South Korea attending Seneca College in Toronto, according to the CBC.
Raymond Cho, a member of Ontario’s provincial Parliament, told Global News that he had spoken with Ms. Kim’s father. “He couldn’t believe — he was very shocked,” Mr. Cho said. The death was particularly sad, he said, because Ms. Kim was “the only daughter, the only child, and she got killed here.”
