Relief in Japan After Shinzo Abe’s Visit With Trump
TOKYO — In many respects, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s trip to Washington and Florida to meet and play golf with President Trump went as well as the Japanese leader could have hoped.
Sure, there was an awkward handshake between the two leaders that may have gone on for too long (and unleashed a meme of Mr. Abe’s uncomfortable facial expression). But after an election campaign in which Mr. Trump frequently criticized Japan on trade issues and accused the country of not paying enough for its military defense, he assured Japan that the relationship between the two countries “runs very, very deep,’’ and showed a deference to Mr. Abe that belied his previous remarks.
Before the visit last week, some in the Japanese news media had gibed Mr. Abe for his apparent eagerness to foster a friendship with Mr. Trump, and some joked that the American president would take advantage of the Japanese leader during their bout of golf diplomacy at the president’s Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida. But in a Kyodo News poll taken after the meeting, 70 percent of the Japanese public said they were satisfied with the talks between the two leaders, and Mr. Abe’s approval ratings rose slightly from a month earlier to close to 62 percent.
“In a basic sense, Prime Minister Abe got almost everything he wanted,” said Fumiaki Kubo, a professor of political science at the University of Tokyo. Mr. Trump’s statements in a joint news conference with Mr. Abe were “totally different from what he has been saying about Japan since the 1980s,” Mr. Kubo said. “That is surprising as well as remarkable. In a sense he showed us, including the American public, that he is capable of changing his position on such an important issue as Japan.”
Mr. Trump, who as a candidate and president-elect assailed Japan as one of the countries that “do not pay us’’ for defense and repeatedly called for an “America First” economy, ended up thanking the people of Japan for hosting United States troops and called for a trading relationship “that is free, fair and reciprocal, benefiting both of our countries.”
Perhaps most significant 
