Princess Cristina of Spain Found Not Guilty of Fraud; Husband Is Convicted
MADRID — Iñaki Urdangarin, the brother-in-law of King Felipe VI of Spain, was sentenced to prison on Friday in a business fraud case that represented a major embarrassment to the country’s monarchy, even though the king’s sister, Princess Cristina, was found not guilty.
A regional court on the island of Majorca sentenced Mr. Urdangarin to six years and three months in prison, far less than the 19 and a half years sought by the prosecution, for his business dealings relating to the disbursement of millions of dollars of public funds for sporting events.
In January 2016, Princess Cristina became the first member of Spain’s royal family to stand trial in modern history, after the authorities began looking into Mr. Urdangarin’s business practices in 2011. The police raided the offices of his nonprofit foundation, the Nóos Institute, as part of an investigation initially prompted by huge cost overruns for the construction of a cycling track on Majorca.
Mr. Urdangarin — who was found guilty on several counts, including fraud, document falsification, tax evasion and influence peddling — was among 18 defendants on trial. He and his business partners were accused of embezzling about 6 million euros, or $6.4 million at current exchange rates, that had been distributed by regional officials for organizing sports events.
The princess was on the board of Nóos, and she and her husband owned a real estate company, Aizoon, that prosecutors claimed was used to channel illegal revenue from Nóos to undeclared bank accounts.
The court on Friday accepted Princess Cristina’s argument that she had not been aware of any wrongdoing by her husband or the companies with which he did business, but she was fined more than €265,000 for her corporate obligations related to the businesses and earnings of her husband. Mr. Urdangarin was fined €512,000.
The prosecution had not sought a prison sentence for Princess Cristina but had called for her to reimburse money earned through her husband’s fraudulent companies. The chances of a tougher sentence against her effectively fizzled last year, after Clean Hands, the private anti-corruption association that had filed the case, was itself caught up in a scandal and disbanded.
Given the gravity of the sentence delivered on Friday, the prosecution was expected to demand that Mr. Urdangarin enter prison immediately, although he and others convicted could still appeal their sentences before the Supreme Court.
The case is one of several political corruption scandals in Spain involving money embezzled from regional governments, many of which started more than a decade ago.
Felipe became king after the abdication of his father, Juan Carlos, in 2014, by which point Mr. Urdangarin had already been cut off from the royal household. In his televised Christmas speech in 2011, Juan Carlos assured Spaniards, “Justice is the same for everyone.”
Since then, King Felipe has also cut the royal family’s public ties with his sister, as part of efforts to fight corruption, increase transparency and improve the tainted image of the monarchy.
Princess Cristina, 51, was stripped by royal decree of her title as Duchess of Palma, but she has kept her succession rights, which put her sixth in line to the throne. She married Mr. Urdangarin, a former Olympic handball player, in 1997.
In recent years, she and her family have spent much of their time away from public view in Geneva, where she has most recently been working for the Aga Khan Foundation.
Among others convicted on Friday was Diego Torres, a former business partner of Mr. Urdangarin’s, who was sentenced to eight years and six months in prison.
Jaume Matas, the former leader of the regional government of the Balearic Islands, was sentenced to three years and eight months in prison, less than the five-year prison term that the prosecution had been seeking for his role in awarding contracts to Mr. Urdangarin and his associates. Mr. Matas is a conservative politician who has already served prison time for fraud.
