Louis Arthur Charles  The British Royal Baby’s Name Is Revealed
LONDON — The British royal family, finally assuaging the curiosity of royal fans and bettors across the land, on Friday revealed the name of the newly born son of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge: Louis Arthur Charles.
The announcement was made by Kensington Palace in a post on Twitter.
The baby, who will be known as Prince Louis of Cambridge, is the third child of Prince William and his wife, Catherine.
He is the fifth in line to the throne, after his grandfather Prince Charles; his father; and his siblings, Prince George and Princess Charlotte.
His name was revealed four days after his mother presented him on Monday to a phalanx of reporters and photographers outside the Lindo Wing of St. Mary’s Hospital in the Paddington neighborhood of London.
His siblings’ names were revealed two days after their births.
Before the announcement, bookmakers had gathered outside Kensington Palace. Among the names that gamblers had favored were Arthur, Albert and Philip.
After the prince was born on Monday, St. George’s Day, named after England’s patron saint, some members of the public had anticipated that George would feature in the new prince’s name.
But one bookmaker was so confident about Arthur that it paid out on the name for anyone who bet before 7 p.m. local time on Monday, according to news reports.
As with the first two children of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, the baby’s name had been expected to follow the royal tradition of choosing names that honor past monarchs or other royals.
Louis is Prince William’s fourth name and was apparently chosen by his father, Prince Charles, as a tribute to Lord Louis Mountbatten, a mentor of Prince Charles’s, a prominent British naval officer and the Duke of Edinburgh’s uncle.
Charles was most likely chosen in honor of William’s father. Both Prince William and Prince Charles have Arthur in their names.
Experts said that the name Arthur was most likely chosen to pay homage to the legend of King Arthur and the Knights of the Roundtable, a legendary fictional figure admired by British royals.
“What’s wonderful about Arthur is it conjures up a kingship that never existed — Camelot was an egalitarian paradise — and, of course, there was the quest for the Holy Grail,” the royal commentator Richard Fitzwilliams told the BBC. “It’s one of the great royal legends.”
Prince Louis’s older brother, Prince George Alexander Louis, 4, was named after six King Georges in the British royal family, including Queen Elizabeth II’s father, King George VI.
The names of Princess Charlotte Elizabeth Diana, 2, are an apparent tribute to her grandmother Diana, Princess of Wales; and her great-grandmother Queen Elizabeth II.
Prince William told reporters on Wednesday that Catherine and the baby were doing “very well” when questioned during an Anzac Day service to honor New Zealand and Australian war veterans.
“They are in good form, luckily,” he said. “Sleeping’s going reasonably well so far, so he’s behaving himself, which is good news.”
Louis was born weeks before the highly anticipated wedding of Prince William’s brother, Prince Harry, and Meghan Markle, an American actress.
Kensington Palace announced on Thursday in a Twitter post that Harry had asked William to be the best man at his wedding, which will take place at St. George’s Chapel in Windsor, England, on May 19. (Harry was the best man when William and Catherine married in 2011.)
More than 600 guests have been invited to the wedding ceremony, and 1,000 members of the public will be welcomed to watch the procession from the grounds of Windsor Castle.
