U.S. Urges U.N. to Conduct ‘Full Investigation’ Into Killings of 2 Investigators in Congo
NAIROBI, Kenya — The American ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki R. Haley, on Thursday urged the organization to go beyond its inquiry into the killings of two investigators in the Democratic Republic of Congo, saying that the U.N. report amounted to only a “first step” in tracking down those responsible.
The United Nations issued a report on Wednesday that largely absolved the organization from responsibility over the deaths, in March, of Michael J. Sharp, an American, and Zaida Catalán, a citizen of Sweden and Chile. The report concluded that the two had ignored security measures available to them while they conducted their investigations. It also implied that they lacked experience.
“The murder of U.N. experts — especially like Michael and Zaida, who risked their own lives in order to help others — cannot end in a bureaucratic procedure,” Ms. Haley said in a statement. She reiterated American demands for “a full investigation.”
“There is simply no other appropriate course of action,” she said.
The deaths of Mr. Sharp, 34, and Ms. Catalán, 36, raised questions about the United Nations and its work in the most dangerous places in the world. Almost two months passed before the United Nations even assembled a panel to look into what went wrong, and its members traveled to Congo only in early June.
The two investigators had been appointed by the United Nations Security Council to an independent panel of experts to look into atrocities in the vast country that has a long history of instability and violence.
Along with a Congolese interpreter, they had gone to a part of Kasaï-Central Province to investigate a rebellion that had pockmarked the area with mass graves. Their own bodies were found in a shallow grave two weeks later. Ms. Catalán had been decapitated.
The United Nations inquiry said that militia members were most likely responsible for the murders with a “reasonable likelihood that the killings were committed after consultation with other local tribal actors.” But others may also have been involved, the inquiry added.
The United Nations has called on the Congolese authorities to investigate the murders and appointed an internal board of inquiry to look into what happened, but it lacked the authority to carry out a criminal investigation. Critics charged that some Congolese officials were themselves implicated in the conflict in the region and in no position to carry out a credible investigation. Mr. Sharp’s father, John Sharp, called for an independent, international inquiry.
Jason Stearns, the director of the Congo Research Group and a former United Nations investigator, said the inquiry made it “seem that the deaths of Michael and Zaida could have been avoided if they had been less reckless and more circumspect.”
Mr. Stearns said the board should have been more forcible in pushing for a thorough investigation. “It is misleading to state that a local militia killed the investigators, and that there is no proof that the government was involved.”
“That makes it seem like the board of inquiry thoroughly investigated the identity of the killers — it did not,” he said. “The main goal of the board of inquiry was to find out whether U.N. rules and regulations were followed, not to establish the identity of the killers.”
According to the board, the two investigators failed to inform their superiors or colleagues of their plans. They rode private motorbikes even though that was not recommended. They also did not request full security briefings or an armed escort.
They prized their independence, according to the board, and were under intense pressure to present their findings to the Security Council. “It is clear,” the report said, that the experts “became party to a situation where they did not believe U.N. security rules and regulations applied to them.”
The United Nations did not provide the experts with the simplest tracking devices commonly used by hikers, and which had been requested by a previous panel. The board recommended additional training for experts, and tracking devices on an “as needed basis.” It also called for better employment conditions “to attract more experienced candidates for these positions.” (Investigators have to buy their own health insurance.)
The two investigators disappeared while traveling to the town of Bunkonde to meet
