Chaos in Central African Republic Imperils Aid Groups’ Work
The United Nations warned on Tuesday of a rapidly worsening armed conflict in the Central African Republic, where tens of thousands of people have fled their homes and aid groups say formerly peaceful areas are now too dangerous for them to carry out their work.
The mayhem in the Central African Republic, the landlocked former French colony that is considered the world’s least developed country, is so severe that many citizens have sought temporary asylum in a neighboring country, the Democratic Republic of Congo — not exactly a safe refuge itself.
The United Nations refugee agency said in a statement that at least 10,000 asylum seekers had fled into the northern Congolese province of Nord-Ubangi in recent days for fear of attack by armed militias. They joined 65,000 others who have crossed the Congolese border since May.
Unicef, the United Nations Children’s Fund, said the number of internally displaced people in the Central African Republic had risen to 600,000 from 440,000 in April and was at the highest level since the last peak of strife three years ago. It said the number of refugees from the Central African Republic in all neighboring countries totals nearly a half million.
Although the capital, Bangui, remains relatively quiet, more than a dozen armed rival political factions control roughly two-thirds of the country and have little or no regard for central government authority — or the United Nations peacekeeping mission.
“The past year, and especially the last quarter, has seen a dramatic increase in violence,” Donaig Le Du, a Unicef spokeswoman, told reporters at the United Nations offices in Geneva.
With a force of roughly 12,300 uniformed personnel, the United Nations peacekeeping mission in the Central African Republic is hardly equipped to ensure civilian safety in a country of roughly five million people. Its reputation has also been marred by a long-running sexual exploitation and abuse scandal.
At least 44 members of the force have been killed since it was deployed in 2014, including two Moroccan soldiers last month.
In a letter to Secretary General António Guterres, dated Monday, prominent aid groups that operate in the country expressed “grave concern about the rapid deterioration of the security situation.”
The groups, including the Norwegian Refugee Council and the International Rescue Committee, said armed conflict had now engulfed previously stable territories and had affected eight of the country’s provinces. “We are witnessing a barrage of indiscriminate attacks targeting civilians across the country,” the letter said.
The letter was sent a little more than a week after six Red Cross volunteers were killed while they held a meeting at a health clinic in the southeast part of the country, the third deadly episode for the Red Cross in the Central African Republic this year.
“If these incidents persist, aid organizations will need to re-evaluate the risks faced by our staff and may be forced to withdraw from especially violent areas,” the letter said.
While many civilians depend on the work of these groups, it said, “we cannot operate in a country where we are the target, where our staff are continuously under fire.”
Among 188 countries surveyed in the United Nations Development Program’s Human Development Index, the Central African Republic, which has suffered upheavals for decades, ranks last.
