Peace Efforts May Be Another Casualty of Bombing in Afghanistan
KABUL, Afghanistan — All around Kabul, the broken glass was being swept and the dead were still being buried on Thursday. They were the most visible signs of the toll taken by the huge truck bombing in the capital the day before, but another casualty of the violence may yet come into view: a new attempt to move toward peace negotiations with the Taliban.
Over the past several weeks, the Afghan government and the foreign missions here have been preparing for a conference on Tuesday 6 in which senior representatives from nearly two dozen countries were to gather in Kabul to discuss the war.
The plan was that President Ashraf Ghani would use the conference as a venue to try to build international support as he emphasized that his government was recommitted to the idea that negotiations were needed. Officials characterized it as an Afghan attempt to bring all the regional and political players together to try to take control of a process that has repeatedly been derailed by a lack of cooperation from neighboring powers and by Taliban military gains.
But the bombing, which the government says was committed by the Haqqani wing of the Taliban, has cast a shadow over the effort in several ways — a demonstration of how fragile even the earliest steps of peacemaking can be in the middle of a war.
Abdul Hakim Mujahid, who used to be a Taliban ambassador to the United Nations and is now a member of Afghan government’s High Peace Council, said that even though the Taliban spokesman had denied that the group was responsible for the bombing on Wednesday, the attack had nevertheless further complicated an already difficult task.
“There are movements underway about peace and the making of a peace deal, but I am not hopeful about the current situation,” Mr. Mujahid said.
First was the physical reality of a huge bomb going off in the diplomatic district of Kabul.
Aides to Mr. Ghani said that he was determined to go ahead with the conference even if it meant some of the foreign dignitaries attending via video conference. And Afghan officials and diplomats scrambled around the city on Thursday, often having to skirt the blast’s large crater as it was being filled by city workers, in a push to keep the meeting on schedule.
Some Western officials said the meeting was on schedule as late as Thursday evening. But several expressed concern, saying the security environment was just not right for dignitaries from their capitals to visit. One diplomat said even the idea of visiting the palace for briefings felt daunting, given how close the bombing was and how steep the death toll was, rising to almost 100 people on Thursday.
The damage from Wednesday’s blast was so widespread that some of the embassies in Kabul were in no shape to host their own dignitaries for the meeting. The windows of the Foreign Ministry, including the hall where many of the sessions were supposed to happen, were also blown in.
The staff at the embassy of the United Arab Emirates, who ambassador and diplomats were killed in another blast in Kandahar in January, was flown out of the country hours after the bombing.
Diplomats at the German Embassy, who had already shifted deeper into their compound upon being alerted of a threat weeks ago, had to evacuate as their facilities were badly damaged. Western officials said the employees of the German development agency, the GIZ, were flown to Dubai, and that some staff from the Turkish mission would also be evacuating temporarily. The Iranian Embassy was also badly damaged.
There was another concern, also: that a forum meant to revive efforts for peace could become another platform for furthering regional tensions if the Afghan government intensified its accusations against Pakistan.
In the hours after the bombing, the Afghan intelligence agency pointedly accused the Pakistani military intelligence service, the Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI, of facilitating the bombing by its allies in the Haqqani network.
In his address to the nation, Mr. Ghani turned to a combative tone again, calling for no restraint in “destroying terrorism,” and making a barely veiled accusation against Pakistan, saying that the international community knows well “those who train and support terrorism as a political tool.”
And on Thursday, local Afghan news media reported that the president had signed the execution orders of 11 members of the Taliban in custody. Such prisoners have long been considered bargaining chips to negotiate with the Taliban, but occasionally they have become easy targets for punishment that appeals to public rage.
The Taliban responded with a threat, saying that if the prisoners were executed, “all offices of the Kabul administration” would come under attack “to teach them a lesson.”
A senior Afghan official said the government was once again struggling between trying to moderate its reaction to keep the door open for a peace process, and being led by an angry public demanding vengeance.
Jawed Ludin, a former deputy foreign minister involved in past peace efforts, said the Afghan government had no choice but to react emotionally after such carnage.
“In helplessness, I think for nations as well as human beings, the emotional response is very important,” Mr. Ludin said. “You are being attacked, and the enemy that attacks you is not within your reach even with the help of the most powerful militaries and the most powerful countries in the world, with all that you have at your disposal.”
He continued: “You are constrained primarily by geography, because people who train these people, mobilize and finance these people, and send them away and equip them are outside your borders. And there is nothing really practically you can do.”
He said past attempts at peace were not necessarily disrupted by emotional reactions, but rather they disintegrated as Pakistan never felt that there would be consequences for not withdrawing support to a Taliban insurgency that has kept Afghanistan weak.
“That critical element to get a process to succeed, that has never been put in place,” Mr. Ludin said. “That critical element is for Pakistan to be confronted with a reality that if they don’t do this, they will face consequences.”
Even if all that could be overcome, officials say the road to peace talks is a long one. And hanging over it is a central question about whether the Taliban, which in recent years has accelerated its military victories, is ready to talk at all right now.
One Western official estimated that it could take two to three more years before the Taliban might realize that it has exhausted its potential for military gains. For that to happen, the Afghan security forces, which had close to 20,000 casualties last year, would need to hold their ground, and the Taliban, estimated to have a fighting force of about 30,000 right now, would also need to keep taking heavy casualties.
But even those calculations can seem optimistic in the face of a war that has continued unabated well into its second decade, and after many failed attempts to start talks.
