JERUSALEM — The six days of the 1967 war were the most important — triumphant, even — in modern Israeli history. But after 50 years, Israel is still struggling with them.
Jews took control of Jerusalem for the first time in two millenniums. Israel went from fully fearing for its survival to controlling more land than it had dreamed of.
But the accidental war and stunning victory also made Israelis occupiers. For with that land — the urban villages of East Jerusalem, the sprawling hills and metropolises of the West Bank, the concrete density of the Gaza Strip — came people: Palestinians now numbering more than 4.5 million.
As the 50th anniversary of that war is marked in a series of events this week, Palestinians, of course, will mourn rather than celebrate what they call the “naksa,” or displacement. But even among Israeli Jews, the milestone does not seem a moment for national outpouring, despite the increasing power of the political right wing.
Questions that percolated in the aftermath of June 7, 1967, when Israeli paratroopers captured Jerusalem’s Old City, remain prominent and unanswered.
Should Israel annex all or part of the West Bank, where 350,000 Jewish settlers now live among 2.5 million Palestinians?
Or is there still a chance to trade some of the land for a lasting peace with the Palestinians?
How much longer can the status quo — a military occupation of checkpoints and other encroachments that is by legal definition temporary but feels ever more permanent — continue?
“A majority of Israelis long ago reached the conclusion that continuing to rule over another people is not good for the long-term health of Israel as a Jewish and democratic society,” said Yossi Klein Halevi, author of “Like Dreamers,” a history of Israel through the lives of paratroopers who fought for the Old City in 1967.
“The problem is the right also won a crucial argument that we don’t have a credible partner for peace,” Mr. Halevi continued. “Israelis are stalemated against themselves.”
So, anniversary budgets are small. Most events, too, are small and spread out: The reunification of Jerusalem, as Israelis consider it, seems safe enough to celebrate. The continuing occupation of the West Bank, much less so.
A spokeswoman for the military, whose triumph in the so-called Six-Day War has been likened to a miracle by some analysts, summed up the muted feeling.
“At this stage, I don’t know to tell you what, if anything, is planned,” she said, speaking on customary terms of anonymity.“I suggest you touch base with us closer to the relevant date.”
Some left-wing and Arab members of Parliament proposed marking the year with a conference titled “50 Years to the Occupation of ’67,” but the governing conservative leadership blocked it.
“The continuation of the occupation does not just hurt the Palestinian people,” said Aida Touma-Suleiman, a Christian Arab lawmaker, "but it also has implications for the State of Israel and its residents, one of which is the trampling of rights and democratic values.”
Israel’s statehood was less than two decades old as tensions rose with neighboring countries in the spring of 1967.
Egypt closed the Straits of Tiran, a crucial shipping lane for Israel in the Red Sea. With Arab armies clearly preparing to attack, Israel struck first, and took out nearly the entire Egyptian Air Force in one day. Jordan — which had taken control of Palestinian areas west of the Jordan River, including East Jerusalem, during the 1948 Arab-Israeli war and annexed them two years later — joined in the 1967 fight but was quickly pushed back.
In less than a week, Israel had tripled the territory under its control. That included the holy sites of the Old City, including the Western Wall, the contested area known by Jews as the Temple Mount and Muslims as Al Aqsa Mosque, the West Bank, Gaza, much of the Golan Heights and the Sinai Peninsula.
Israel later annexed East Jerusalem and Golan in moves that were not internationally recognized. Sinai was traded in 1979 to Egypt for a peace that remains stable today. Jordan renounced any claims over the West Bank in 1988, saying it wished to see instead the birth of a Palestinian state there. Israel withdrew its settlements and soldiers from Gaza in 2005, but continues to control travel and trade there.
That leaves the West Bank, which the Oslo peace accords of the 1990s divvied into three realms as a precursor to a Palestinian statehood that has yet to come to fruition. Cities like Jenin, Jericho, Bethlehem and Ramallah are officially under full control of the Palestinian Authority government, though the Israeli Army makes some raids there.
In the villages around the cities, the Palestinians have control of civil affairs but the Israelis control security. And Israel is in full control of two-thirds of the total land mass, the location of the vast majority of some 130 settlements.
While many Israeli Jews see the West Bank, full of biblical sites, as theirs by God’s plans, most are not focused on it this June. Instead, their eyes are on the holy city of Jerusalem.
“Has this seminal moment of Jewish history brought complexity?” asked Doron Perez, head of the World Mizrachi Movement, an umbrella group for religious Zionists. “It absolutely has. But you have to get back to first principles, which was the return of the Jewish people to its holiest city.”
Michael Oren, a deputy minister and former Israeli ambassador to the United States who wrote a history of the 1967 war, said, “The reunification of Jerusalem, that is pretty much an Israeli national consensus issue that should be celebrated.”
Yisrael Harel, one of the paratroopers at the Western Wall that day 50 years ago, has taken the right-wing government to task for playing down the anniversary. But even Mr. Harel, 78, a leader of the post-1967 settler movement and conservative newspaper columnist, said he partly understood its reasoning.
“The right had a dream of annexation, fulfilling the dreams of Israel coming to the borders that will secure its security for a long time,” Mr. Harel said. “The left thought that the territories would be cards for peace.”
Neither has happened. Instead, the years since Oslo have been marked by rounds of failed negotiations and escalating cycles of violence.
The stasis, combined with high tension, was on display during a recent visit to the West Bank settlement at Psagot, home to a winery popular with tourists, and its Palestinian neighbors.
“God promised us we could come back,” said Yaakov Berg, the winery’s owner. “You need to celebrate that. The land came back. It’s become heaven.”
Abdelrahman Qur’an, 74, a barber who lives in a house separated from Psagot by a street and empty lot, acknowledged that the Israelis had successfully made the desert bloom.
“They are right,” he said. “They fixed the land. They built a settlement.
“But this is not their land.”
Could he imagine a return to the days when he cut Jews’ hair or lent his chairs for a settler wedding?
“There is no chance,” he said. “Those bones have been broken.”
The irony — often noted as the anniversary nears — is that taking the West Bank was not a planned part of the war, rather an aftereffect. What is now seen as disaster or divine message, depending on what you believe, was, at the time, neither to most people.
“Have you already thought about how we can live with so many Arabs?” Levi Eshkol, the famously indecisive prime minister during the war, asked as the military operation was debated.
Afterward, he mused: “If it were up to us, we’d send all the Arabs out to Brazil.”
Even Israeli Jews who believed the land rightfully belonged to them worried about how to incorporate it into their state. If they granted the Palestinians citizenship, their Jewish majority could soon be threatened; if they did not, what did it mean for their democracy?
The foreboding began even in the moment of victory 50 years ago. The defense minister, Moshe Dayan, put his good eye — one was famously covered by a patch — to binoculars to see the Israeli flag flying over the Temple Mount. Then he immediately ordered the flag taken down — worried, even then, about the ramifications of visible Israeli mastery of a site considered one of the holiest in Islam.
There are, to be sure, plenty of Israelis — and right-leaning politicians — eager to seize the anniversary as a moment to push for Israeli sovereignty in the West Bank.
“We don’t see this as occupation,” said Tzipi Hotovely, the deputy foreign minister, who believes the land was promised by God to the Jews. “People can’t occupy their own land.”
Naftali Bennett, the education minister and head of the Jewish Home Party, has designated $3 million to celebrate the anniversary and Jewish settlements in the West Bank. The main event will be at Kfar Etzion, south of Jerusalem — the first settlement built in the heady days after the West Bank was captured in the 1967 war, on the site of a kibbutz in which 157 Jews were massacred in 1948.
“A nation that is concerned for its future must always look back at its past and know how to continue its dynasty,” Mr. Bennett said in announcing the celebration.
But like most of the 1967 anniversary events, this one is expected to be modest, with little of the unconflicted triumphalism of the celebration of the nation’s founding, and little clue about what is next.
