Britain resumes intelligence sharing with the U.S. after brief pause
   The special relationship continues, after a brief interruption. 
   British counterterrorism officials confirmed Thursday that they have resumed intelligence with the U.S. after receiving "fresh assurances" that it would not be leaked. 
   "We greatly value the crucial relationship with our trusted partners around the world so we can collaborate and share sensitive information to defeat terrorism and protect the public at home and abroad," Britain's national counterterrorism head Mark Rowley said in a statement. 
   "While we do not usually comment on information sharing arrangements with international law enforcement organizations, we want to emphasize that, having received fresh assurances, we are now working closely with our key partners around the world including all those in the 'Five Eyes' intelligence alliance." 
   The U.S. and U.K. are two members of the "Five Eyes," a close network of western countries that also includes Australia, Canada and New Zealand. 
   Manchester police also announced early Friday that they've arrested another suspect in connection with the explosion, the 10th since Tuesday. 
   Britain had reacted angrily to leaks of information to the U.S. after the Manchester attack that killed 22 people, including one that led American outlets to first report the name of suspected suicide bomber Salman Abedi. 
   Prime Minister Theresa May reportedly brought up the issue with President Trump during a conversation Thursday after the New York Times received and published leaked crime scene photos of the carnage outside Manchester Arena on Wednesday. 
   The BBC reported early Thursday afternoon that British police had stopped sharing information with the Americans, though Rowley's statement came out Thursday. 
   Trump himself also conflated the Manchester leaks with those that had spurred a series of stories about the investigation into possible Russian collusion with his campaign and his reported efforts to stop it. 
   "These leaks have been going on for a long time and my Administration will get to the bottom of this," he said in a statement during a trip to Belgium. 
   He added that the leaks were a threat to national security, adding that "the culprit should be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law" after a Department of Justice Review.   
