A ‘Dark Lord’ Falls in Russia’s Growing Power Struggle
VOLGOGRAD, Russia — A veteran law enforcement official, the head of the regional branch of Russia’s version of the F.B.I., acquired such a fearsome reputation in the southern Russian city formerly known as Stalingrad that when he walked into a local restaurant last summer, the other customers got up and left.
“Within a few minutes, the place was empty,” said Vyacheslav Cherepakhin, a local entrepreneur and journalist. “Everyone in the city was afraid of him.”
Last month, however, the official, Mikhail K. Muzraev, was forced from his car at gunpoint near his home in the city now called Volgograd by a team of heavily armed men sent from Moscow by Russia’s Federal Security Service, or F.S.B., the main successor agency to the K.G.B. He was flown to Moscow and jailed the same day.
Mr. Muzraev’s arrest roiled an uneasy balance at the heart of President Vladimir V. Putin’s rule among the so-called siloviki — a vast network of security, intelligence and military officials whose power, resources and clan rivalries have grown steadily at a time when Russia is starting to ask what will happen when the president’s ostensibly final term runs out in 2024.
Since Mr. Putin came to power nearly 20 years ago, rival agencies like the F.S.B. and Mr. Muzraev’s organization, the Investigative Committee, have cooperated in persecuting the Kremlin’s critics. They are now increasingly at odds amid mostly hidden jockeying to influence a protracted and possibly unruly succession struggle. With the arrest of Mr. Muzraev, however, the infighting burst into the open.
Over 10 years as a senior prosecutor and then head of Volgograd’s Investigative Committee, Mr. Muzraev jailed two mayors and the chiefs of the regional police, the traffic police, the anti-narcotics squad and the emergency services, as well as a host of prominent businessmen in the Volga River city.
In interviews, several of those blamed Mr. Muzraev for destroying their lives with what they said were bogus criminal charges, and rejoiced at his unexpected downfall. But even they don’t believe the story put forward by the F.S.B. that their nemesis was involved in an assassination attempt against the regional governor, Andrei Bocharov, a former paratroop commander appointed by Mr. Putin to rule Volgograd in 2014.
The alleged attack on the governor — a laughably inept act of arson in a heavily guarded luxury housing estate in Volgograd — took place three years ago, hurt nobody, caused little damage and had previously been declared solved with the jailing of the supposed arsonists.
“Nobody believes this fairy tale,” said Roman Zaitsev, a former Volgograd police investigator who left the force to become a lawyer. Mr. Zaitsev was charged in 2017 by Mr. Muzraev with “inciting false testimony” after he refused to get one of his clients to confess to a murder he denied committing.
Mr. Zaitsev said he felt “brief euphoria” and drank champagne to celebrate after learning that Mr. Muzraev had been detained by the F.S.B. But his giddiness quickly faded as he realized that “this is not a victory for justice” but the result of “fighting between different clans from the same system.”
“This is not a fight between good and evil. It is evil against evil,” Mr. Zaitsev said.
On Thursday, in another sign of turmoil in Volgograd’s justice system, a female judge on the municipal court was found dead outside her apartment building in the center of the city. She was reported to have “fallen” from the window of her apartment on the 15th floor.
Nikolai Petrov, a political scientist, said the abrupt fall from grace at the hands of the F.S.B. of such a powerful law-enforcement figure as Mr. Muzraev was a clear sign that a divide-and-rule balance between different clans of “siloviki” — whose loyalty to the Kremlin and wariness of each other have been the bedrock of Mr. Putin’s rule — is wobbling.
“Without a clear signal from Putin about what he will do in 2024 or who will replace him, the whole system is coming apart,,” Mr. Petrov said. “Putin is in control of all major moves, but we see more and more moves by this or that elite clan.”
On the day after Mr. Muzraev’s arrest on June 10, the Interior Ministry, which oversees Russia’s regular police forces, ordered the release from jail of Ivan Golunov, an investigative journalist who, after reporting on shady ties between the F.S.B. and the funeral industry, had been arrested in Moscow on clearly trumped-up drugs charges.
Independent Russian news outlets reported that corrupt Moscow F.S.B. officials involved in the funeral business had played a role in framing the journalist, but had then backed off after low-level police officers entrusted with fabricating the case bungled so clumsily that even the Kremlin was aghast.
Last week, seven F.S.B. officers, including members of the agency’s anti-corruption department and the grandson of a secret police general, were arrested for suspected involvement in a Moscow bank robbery last year. The bank is owned by a former officer in Russia
