Turkey Investigating 17, Some Americans, Accused in Failed Coup
ISTANBUL — A Turkish prosecutor has opened an investigation into 17 people accused of fomenting last year’s failed coup, including many prominent American officials, academics and politicians, state news media reported on Saturday.
Among those placed under investigation by the chief prosecutor in Istanbul are John O. Brennan, the former C.I.A. chief; Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York; Preet Bharara, the former United States attorney for the Southern District of New York; and David Cohen, who at the time of the coup was the deputy director of the C.I.A., according to the Anadolu Agency, a state-run news wire.
The investigation was announced just a day before a national referendum to expand the powers of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, leading to speculation that the two events were linked.
Throughout the campaign, Mr. Erdogan and his allies have frequently manufactured diplomatic spats with European countries, in what some analysts described as a bid to persuade nationalist voters to vote “yes” to his proposed reforms to secure Turkey’s place in the world.
The accusations against the Americans might have been launched with similar intentions, said Soner Cagaptay, the author of a coming biography of Mr. Erdogan, “The New Sultan.”
“The ‘yes’ camp still doesn’t feel safe. It’s still searching for foreign enemies and conspiracies to mobilize nationalist and Islamist support,” said Mr. Cagaptay, a Turkey researcher at the Washington Institute, a think tank.
The investigation may also be a tit-for-tat response to the recent arrest in New York of an executive from a state-owned Turkish bank, according to Henri J. Barkey, the director of the Middle East Program at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
“It’s partly: You’re arresting our people, we can do the same to you,” said Mr. Barkey, who was among those placed under investigation.
Mr. Bharara, who was ousted from office last month by the Trump administration, had opened an investigation into Reza Zarrab, a wealthy Turkish trader with connections to Mr. Erdogan. Mehmet Hakan Atilla, a Turkish banker, was arrested as part of that case after Mr. Bharara was fired.
The investigation may also be a reflection of Turkey’s dwindling hopes of involvement in the American-led campaign to take Raqqa, the capital of the Islamic State, analysts said. Or it may have been begun by an overzealous prosecutor seeking to demonstrate his loyalty to Mr. Erdogan or his party, the A.K.P, said Mr. Cagaptay.
“These may not be centralized efforts coming from A.K.P. leaders but may come from more low-level people who act in such ways that they think they’re mirroring the great leader,” Mr. Cagaptay said.
