Turkey’s Erdogan  Democracy’s Savior or Saboteur?
ANKARA, Turkey — The political career of Yasar Yakis, a former foreign minister of Turkey, offers a telling look at the trajectory of the country’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Fifteen years ago, Mr. Yakis was a founding member of Mr. Erdogan’s political group, the Justice and Development Party, or A.K.P. for short. Mr. Yakis was a career diplomat and stalwart of the secular Turkish bureaucracy, and his appointment as foreign minister in 2002 embodied the party’s attempts to appeal beyond its conservative, Islamist base.
But less than four months later, Mr. Yakis lost his cabinet post. In the years since, he has been increasingly at odds with Mr. Erdogan, as the leader’s policies grew increasingly authoritarian.
Mr. Erdogan, Mr. Yakis remarked, once compared democracy with a tram: You can leave it once you reach your stop. Today, Mr. Yakis said, Mr. Erdogan “is not any longer on the tram.”
On Sunday, Turkish voters will decide whether to vastly expand the powers of the president, who has overseen the firing of about 130,000 people and the arrest of about 45,000 after a failed coup last year.
Mr. Erdogan’s supporters view the constitutional referendum as a necessary response to the chaos in Turkey. They say the proposed constitutional changes would give the president the tools needed to quell Turkey’s many crises.
But Mr. Erdogan’s critics insist that he is trying to take advantage of the turmoil to shroud a major power grab. They say that granting enormous new executive powers to the presidency, when the current office holder has already shown authoritarian tendencies, just might sound the death knell for Turkish democracy.
No one questions that Turkey is grappling with a long string of troubles. To reassert control after the failed coup last year, Mr. Erdogan has created an administrative vacuum by purging or arresting about 175,000 people.
Many of the purged are accused of association with the movement led by Fethullah Gulen, the reclusive Muslim cleric in self-imposed exile in Pennsylvania, who Mr. Erdogan says orchestrated the July 15 uprising. But some are dissidents from secular, leftist or Kurdish backgrounds. More than 120 of them are journalists, according to Amnesty International.
The economy is struggling. Nearly one in four young Turks is out of work — the highest percentage since the peak of the financial crisis in early 2009. And beyond Turkey’s southern border, Mr. Erdogan has dwindling influence on shaping the outcome of the Syrian civil war, should it finally be settled.
His favored Syrian proxies have failed to oust Bashar al-Assad, the Syrian president, while Kurdish militias — which Mr. Erdogan sees as terrorists — have established autonomous statelets in two parts of northern Syria, with the implicit backing of the United States and Russia.
The Syrian war has also spilled over into Turkey, where more Syrian refugees — around three million — have sought shelter than in any other country.
Turkey has its own internal battles, too. The Islamic State and Kurdish nationalists are waging separate terrorist campaigns on Turkish soil. The crushing of a recent Kurdish uprising in southeast Turkey left the centers of several majority-Kurdish cities in worse condition than some Syrian ones, and displaced up to half a million people.
Adding to this mess, Mr. Erdogan has a toxic relationship with Europe, accusing countries like the Netherlands and Germany of Nazism after they barred his surrogates from holding referendum rallies for expatriate Turks on their territory.
According to Mr. Yakis, the scale of the diplomatic fallout, which has probably ended any remaining hopes of Turkey’s joining the European Union, has few parallels.
“I don’t remember an era in the recent decades and scores of years in which Turkey was isolated to this extent,” said Mr. Yakis, 78. “I don’t remember periods where Turkish public opinion was as divided” within the country, he added.
To Mr. Erdogan, the answer to all these challenges is the expansion of his mandate.
For now, he is by law, though not in practice, an impartial head of state who lacks full executive authority. The new system would allow him both to lead his own party and to formally hold full executive power — power that he has informally exercised since moving from prime minister to president in 2014, despite not having the constitutional right to wield such clout.
If enough Turks vote for the constitutional changes — and some polls suggest they might, after prolonged intimidation of the “no” vote — whoever wins presidential elections in 2019 will gain an expansive new mandate.
The post of prime minister will be scrapped, giving only the president the power to form a government while reducing the ability of other institutions to scrutinize his decisions. The president would be limited to two five-year terms, with the option of running for a third term if Parliament truncated the second one by calling for early elections.
“The referendum reorganizes the fundamentals of the state,” said Ertugrul Yalcinbayir, who served alongside Mr. Yakis as deputy prime minister in the A.K.P.’s first cabinet, and who is now campaigning against expanding the president’s powers.
Under the new system, the president would have the power to issue decrees, appoint a vast array of top officials and set the national budget, all with limited legal oversight. If Parliament rejects the president’s budget, the previous year’s program would continue with minor adjustments, unlike in the United States where lawmakers can ensure a government shutdown.
Under the proposed measure, the president would appoint 12 of the 15 judges on the constitutional court, the body with the ultimate authority to scrutinize the legality of his decrees. He would appoint six of the 13 members of the country’s higher judicial authority, which oversees the appointment of Turkey’s 14,000 judges and prosecutors. Three of the rest would be selected by Parliament, making it likely that he and his party would appoint most of the members of the two most important judicial bodies in the land.
“Checks and balances will be extraordinarily weak and difficult to apply,” Mr. Yalcinbayir said. “We are not saying it will necessarily be an authoritarian state. But this new package could lead the way to that, and we can’t live with that fear.”
One amendment would even allow the president to order disciplinary inquiries into any of Turkey’s 3.5 million civil servants, said Metin Feyzioglu, the head of the Turkish bar association. This means that the local branch of the president’s political party “in a particular town would have de facto power over the public servants in that town,” Mr. Feyzioglu said. “It leads to a total party state.”
Yet, Mr. Erdogan’s supporters see things differently. They highlight how the new constitution would abolish army courts, further diminishing the influence of the military, which has ousted four elected governments in less than 60 years.
The constitution would also give the opposition the power to override the president’s decrees with its own legislation, and to call for early presidential and parliamentary elections, as long as opposition parties managed to win a majority in Parliament.
But even if they cannot, the prospect of an all-powerful Erdogan presidency is still palatable to many Turks.
“If it is going to give him more power,” said Merve Kavakci, a political scientist who supports Mr. Erdogan, “and if it is what the Turkish people want, so be it.”
Under Mr. Erdogan, Turkey’s economy was, for a time, one of the world’s fastest-growing. He upgraded infrastructure, built roads and bridges and improved health care and social services. A stronger presidency might allow him to accelerate this progress, his supporters say.
“He’s a doer,” said Professor Kavakci, a former lawmaker who lectures at Uskudar University in Istanbul. “Things will get done in an easier way.”
Could a “yes” vote also calm a chaotic Turkey? Nasuhi Gungor, a confidant of the president and a former head of news at the Turkish state broadcaster TRT, thinks so.
Once clear of the divisive referendum campaign, political discourse might become more measured, Mr. Gungor said. The president might seek a fresh rapprochement with the Kurds. “Turkey will relax after April 16,” he said.
Professor Kavakci, a former lawmaker who was shouted out of Parliament in 1999 when she arrived wearing a head scarf, even asserts that an expanded Erdogan presidency would make Turkey “more pluralistic” and “more democratic.” Mr. Erdogan has brought dignity to veiled Turkish women by gradually rescinding the laws that barred them from state university campuses and jobs in the Civil Service.
For this section of society, Mr. Erdogan represents the protection rather than an erosion of democratic values. He provides a buffer for those previously sidelined by the Kemalist hierarchy, the nationalist, largely monocultural and staunchly secular elite, named after Turkey’s founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, that oversaw Turkey for much of the 20th century.
But in a sign of Turkey’s deep divisions, some members of other marginalized groups fear that Mr. Erdogan and his party care only for their conservative base.
“In 2002, A.K.P. promised a change in Turkey,” said Abdullah Demirbas, a former mayor of Sur, an ancient Kurdish district destroyed during Kurdish uprisings last year. “They said they’re bringing democracy not only for themselves, but for all the other aggrieved groups in Turkey, which gave hope to the masses: Kurds, Armenians, Assyrians, democrats, liberals, intellectuals, writers, socialists — all the victims of the old regime.”
In reality, Mr. Demirbas argues, “they just did all this to consolidate their own power. Kemalism has gone, and in its place has come Green Kemalism,” a reference to the color commonly associated with Islam.
Nevertheless, few think Mr. Erdogan would use a referendum victory to establish a religious state.
He has spoken in the past of seeking to create a new generation of pious youths, has already significantly increased the number of religious schools and this week questioned the piety of those who would vote “no” on Sunday.
But despite the departure of figures like Mr. Yakis, the A.K.P. still bears little resemblance to most Islamist parties elsewhere in the region. Unlike the Muslim Brotherhood’s political wing in Egypt, for example, its lawmakers include women who do not wear head scarves, politicians who have never called for Shariah law and others who portray themselves as conservatives rather than Islamists.
“There are, in the inner court of the A.K. Party, those who think that Turkey has to turn away from the West and embrace Middle Eastern countries,” Mr. Yakis said. “But in the long run, I don’t think that it’s possible” because enough of the electorate would not stand for it, he added.
Whatever the result on Sunday, little may change immediately, Mr. Yakis reckons. Win, and Mr. Erdogan simply bestows constitutional legitimacy on the status quo. Lose, and he will continue to act as a de facto executive president.
In the longer term, however, a “yes” vote will accelerate Turkey’s authoritarian descent, Mr. Yakis said. “There is a general rule in the social sciences: Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.”
But such a power grab, he said, might ultimately be unsustainable. “The Turkish electorate,” he said, “is capable of resisting or going against a strong leader when it is necessary.”
