Iraqi Held After Borussia Dortmund Attack Is Suspected of ISIS Ties
BERLIN — An Iraqi who was detained after the bombing of a soccer team bus in Dortmund is suspected of having led an Islamic State unit before fleeing to Germany last year, the federal prosecutor said Thursday.
The 26-year-old Iraqi, identified only as Abdul Beset A. in keeping with German privacy laws, was arrested on Wednesday after the police searched his home in the Ruhr city of Wuppertal in connection with the attack on Tuesday that forced the postponement of a Champions League quarterfinal match.
One player was wounded in the bombing, which stirred widespread anxiety about the security of the nation’s — and the world’s — most popular sport, and the Borussia Dortmund team’s coach and several players spoke harshly about the decision to play the rescheduled game less than 24 hours later.
Frauke Köhler, a spokeswoman for the federal prosecutor’s office in Karlsruhe, said there was insufficient evidence to link the Iraqi to the Dortmund bombing, but she maintained that he should be held because of his connection to the Islamic State.
“According to the findings,” Ms. Köhler said, he commanded a unit of about 10 fighters whose task was to prepare and carry out kidnappings, blackmail and killings. He left for Turkey in March 2015 and arrived in Germany early last year, at the tail end of a wave of more than one million migrants.
The authorities said that a letter that was found after the explosions demanded that Germany withdraw its Tornado aircraft from the multinational campaign against the Islamic State in Syria and close Ramstein Air Base, a hub for American and NATO military forces.
The police, prosecutors and politicians have come under fire for failing to expel or detain Islamist suspects since it emerged that a Tunisian terrorist who seized a truck and plowed it into a Christmas market in Berlin last year, killing 12 people and wounding 50, was a criminal who should have been deported.
Last Friday, an Uzbek citizen stole a beer truck and rammed it into shoppers in Stockholm, killing four people. He, too, was ordered to leave months earlier.
The police also searched the home in Unna, near Dortmund, of a 28-year-old German, but found nothing linking him to the bombing, a spokesman for the federal prosecutor said Thursday.
The explosion of three devices placed in a hedge on the route taken by the soccer team’s bus to the stadium on Tuesday night prompted a national debate about security, particularly in Dortmund’s state, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany’s most populous.
The debate is particularly intense there because the state harbors hundreds of people who are believed to be Islamists, and it will hold elections in May that are widely viewed as a bellwether before national elections on Sept. 24.
Chancellor Angela Merkel, a soccer fan who condemned the Dortmund bombing as a “repulsive act,” said in an interview published on Thursday that the varying practices of the authorities in Germany’s 16 states were partly to blame for the security problem.
In unusually direct terms perhaps dictated by the coming state election — her center-right party is expected to lose — Ms. Merkel criticized the state for failing, for instance, to allow spot ID checks and searches of people the police consider suspicious.
As home to almost 18 million people and one in five German voters, North Rhine-Westphalia also takes the most asylum seekers under a system devised by the Allies after World War II.
Tuesday’s soccer match, the first leg of a Champions League quarterfinal against Monaco, was postponed that evening but quickly rescheduled to Wednesday evening, less than 24 hours after the bombing.
Monaco won, 3-2, with a return match next week. The decision by Borussia Dortmund officials and UEFA, soccer’s governing body in Europe, to play so soon after the terrifying episode was denounced by the team’s coach and several players.
“We were informed by text message,” the coach, Thomas Tuchel, told reporters after the match. “To decide things in Switzerland when we are affected did not feel good.”
“At the very least, it makes you feel powerless,” he added.
Speaking in English at a news conference on Thursday, Mr. Tuchel said the feeling in the bus seconds after the bombing was “surrealistic.” He said he hugged and comforted the players, some of whom witnessed the explosion.
“Those faces in the bus, in those minutes, will stay with me my whole life,” Nuri Sahin, a Turkish-German stalwart of the Dortmund team, said after the match. “It was terrible.”
Another team member, Roman Weidenfeller, said violence always seems far away, but suddenly it was “so close.”
“We had great luck that it wasn’t worse,” he said.
