   Manhattan: Re "Here's to my fave murderer" (Nov. 13) showing a toast between President Donald Trump and Philippine President Rodrigo Roa Duterte: 
   Characterizing a democratically-elected head of state and government in this manner is the height of journalistic irresponsibility and malice. 
   Despite what you describe as "his clenched-fisted, expletive-filled rants," Duterte is precisely loved by Filipinos for his raw honesty. In just a little over a year at the helm of government, he has effected profound and ground­breaking changes to make their lives better. 
   The labels attached to the president by some media establishments such as yours betray a sad lack of journalistic standards and understanding of the political context of the Philippines. 
   It is obviously based on the false perception that the government is involvedin the indiscriminate killing of drug offenders. This is clearly not the policy of the government, as seen by the fact that around a million drug offenders have surrendered and are under rehabilitation. 
   Need we remind you that the Philippines is a thriving democracy, with one of the freest presses in the world as well as an unfettered judiciary? Any allegations of state­sponsored killings without any sufficient basis are merely allegations. 
   Duterte has won wide respect for his astute and efficient chairmanship of the recently concluded ASEAN summit this month. The fact that The News chose to take an unfounded and malicious tack in featuring an event during the Philippines' ASEAN Chairmanship disrespects not only Duterte and the office he holds but also the millions of Filipinos the world over, including those in the United States. 
   We would hope that common decency prevail in the determination of content in your publication. Ma. Theresa Dizon De Vega, Consul General, Philippine Consulate 
   Manhattan: What horror do we have to endure next from the Trump administration ("Trump reverses ban on importing elephants killed as trophies," Nov. 16)? Now I'm sure we'll see Don Jr. and Eric Trump standing by a dead elephant, proudly displaying a trunk or tail — despite the fact that elephants are on the endangered species list. Not to mention the wanton cruelty of these hunters. When is enough enough? Brenda Nicholls 
   Delmar, N.Y.: S.E. Cupp is absolutely correct and I applaud her for taking liberals to task ("Liberals must face tough facts about what Bill and Hillary Clinton did to sex-assault accusers," Op-Ed, Nov. 14). I am a 71-year old feminist who had to hold my nose and try not to gag when I voted for Hillary. Esther Sosman 
   Glendale: Really! You found it so newsworthy to comment on President Trump drinking water ("President Trump takes one awkward sip of Fiji water as he channels his inner Marco Rubio," Nov. 15). Find something of more value to report on than this childish stuff. Rosie Stine 
   Bronx: Ivanka Trump apparently has the same bad memory as our illustrious attorney general. Ivanka is upset with Roy Moore and the accusations of his sexual misconduct with a minor. She doesn't remember the incident many years ago when her father saw a 10 year-old girl visiting Trump Tower and then said into a television camera, "I'll be dating her in about ten years." The whole world has seen this tape. Ivanka doesn't find that disturbing? I guess Daddy can do no wrong. David Gonzalez  
   Staten Island: So how does an overrated fool like Blake Shelton still get to be Sexiest Man Alive from People magazine? When he openly said on Twitter had a fantasy about then 16 year-old Dakota Fanning? My all-time hypocrisy lowlife celebrity favorite is R. Kelly having sex with a 14-year-old on tape and Lady Gaga performing with him on liberal horrible "Saturday Night Live" a few years ago. Sad, the double standards we have for the rich. Anthony Liverano 
   Duxbury, Mass.: Imagine history if Abraham Lincoln had President Donald Trump's Congress! Both Presidents Trump and Lincoln welcomed an alliance with Russia. In fact, Lincoln reached out to Tsar Alexander shortly after Russia freed 23 million serfs/slaves in 1861. Lincoln tasked his Secretary of the Navy Gideon Wells to secretly find a way to strengthen political, economic and military alliances with Russia. These communications are memorialized at the Institute of World History in Moscow. Imagine if Lincoln had Trump's Democratic Congress during the Civil War? What If Lincoln faced the Russian scrutiny and virulent witch hunting fellow Republican Trump is enduring? The result may have been the retraction of Tsar Alexander's alliance and the cancellation of the mission to send the Russian Baltic fleet to New York harbor on Sept. 24, 1863, and the Russian Far East fleet to San Francisco on Oct. 12, 1863. Lincoln's risky Russian alliance thwarted the English, French and Papal States from recognizing the Confederacy because Russia had the back of Lincoln and the Union. Who knows, without the Russians we might be two separate countries, the Confederate States being one of them. I say, give Trump the same opportunity for success with the Russians that Lincoln forged more that 150 years ago. Paul Mellen 
   Miami: Following are the words to our country's Pledge of Allegiance: "I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all." Please take note of the last seven words. The NFL players and supporters are kneeling in protest for the abuse by police of black men and women. It has to do with equality, gun violence, racism, poor school systems in their neighborhoods, etc. Why do they protest during the national anthem? Because it is played to the flag, which stands for equal protection under the law, that no person or group of persons should be subject to different treatment than others. Segundo Pinedo 
   Brooklyn: I wonder if anybody would take offense if I were to start and new network. I would like to name it WET — for white entertainment television. Jeffrey P. Smith 
   Staten Island: It's Voicer Helen Hill Updike who has her facts wrong when she supports the players' protests against police abuse of black citizens. I suggest she read Heather Mac Donald's book "The War On Cops" for more truthful data on police/black interactions. If the players were really concerned about blacks being abused, they would be better off kneeling and praying in front of Chicago housing projects, where numerous blacks are murdered every year by other blacks. It's not the police killing them. Why doesn't The News ever mention that blacks, who compose 13% of the population, commit almost half of the major crimes? That only increases the rate of dangerous police/black interactions. The players unfairly stigmatize the police. They need to look at themselves. Joseph Valente 
   New City, N.Y.: In an otherwise excellent article on the mayor's failure to deliver on promises, columnist Errol Louis did make one error ("Bill comes due on promises," Nov. 14). He stated "A nonfinancial crisis has been brewing in the yeshivas that serve the city's ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities." This is not accurate; suborning ignorance has a very high price tag. It is already causing financial crises in Ramapo as these schools tragically deny their students their full potential and their refusal to teach New York's mandated curricula prepares them for no career other than ward of the state. James Flynn 
   Brooklyn: MTA Chairman Joe Lhota's response to testimony of people with disabilities about the inaccessibility of NYC's subways was "Like I don't have enough f---ing problems." Like we New Yorkers don't have enough effing problems with the MTA and Access-A-Ride! Isn't it part of the job of the head of a major municipal transportation system in the 21st century to make sure that the system meets the transportation needs of its potential riders? Barbara Abramowitz   
