John Mbiti, 87, Dies; Punctured Myths About African Religions
John Mbiti, a prominent Christian theologian from Kenya who helped debunk entrenched ideas that traditional African religions were primitive, giving them equal weight with major world faiths, died on Oct. 5 at a nursing home in Burgdorf, Switzerland. He was 87. 
His daughter Maria Mbiti confirmed the death but did not give the cause. 
In his writings, Mr. Mbiti described a landscape of tribal and national religions in Africa that might have lacked sacred texts like the Bible but that nonetheless lived deeply in people’s hearts and minds, in rituals and oral histories, and through priests, elders and kings.
“Everyone is a religious carrier,” he wrote in his influential book “African Religions and Philosophy” (1969), a result of his field work in Africa. 
“Wherever the African is,” he added, “there is his religion.” 
He disputed characterizations of African religions as anti-Christian at best and practiced by savages at worst — labels that had been used to justify imperialism and slavery.
African religions, he said, were as deeply rooted, and as legitimate, as Christianity, Islam, Judaism and Buddhism.
“The God described in the Bible is none other than the God who is already known in the framework of our traditional African religiosity,” Mr. Mbiti wrote in The Christian Century magazine in 1980. “The missionaries who introduced the gospel to Africa in the past 200 years did not bring God to our continent. Instead, God brought them.”
Jacob K. Olupona, a professor of African religious traditions at the Harvard Divinity School who helped edit a book of essays about Mr. Mbiti’s legacy, said by phone: “He opened the field and got people talking about traditional African religions in a different context. For African scholars like me, he was the very model of scholarship.”
Devaka Premawardhana, a professor of religion at Emory University in Atlanta, praised Mr. Mbiti for challenging perceptions of Africa as a continent without history, civilization or religion, and for “uncovering and undercutting the very foundations of Western supremacy.”
But, he said, Mr. Mbiti was criticized, most famously by the Ugandan writer Okot p’Bitek, for casting his arguments in intellectual terms that had been established by the West. Mr. Mbiti insisted, for example, that African cosmologies ultimately align with Christian views of God as omnipotent, omnipresent and eternal.
“The African deities of the books, clothed with the attributes of the Christian God, are, in the main, creations of the students of African religions” like Mr. Mbiti, Mr. p’Bitek wrote in “African Religions in Western Scholarship” (1970). “They are all beyond recognition to the ordinary Africans in the countryside.” 
Mr. Mbiti never responded to the criticism, according to Derek Peterson, a professor of history and African Studies at the University of Michigan.
John Samuel Mbiti was born on Nov. 30, 1931, in Mulango, Kenya. His father,  Mutuvi Ngaangi, and his mother, Valesi Mbandi, were farmers. Raised and schooled as a Christian, he accepted the prevailing view of traditional African religions as demonic. 
After graduating from a high school near Nairobi, Mr. Mbiti studied English, sociology and geography at University College of Makerere in Kampala, Uganda, in 1953. He then received a bachelor’s degree in theology from Barrington College, a Christian liberal arts school in Rhode Island.
After teaching briefly in Kenya and Britain, he earned a Ph.D. in theology at Cambridge University, where he met his future wife, Verena Siegenthaler. Around that time he was also ordained as an Anglican priest by the Church of England. He served as a parish priest in England for a while before returning to Makerere in 1964 as a teacher of traditional African religions.
His lack of knowledge about the subject led him to his field work, and to the publication of “African Religions and Philosophy.” 
Mr. Mbiti quickly became a leading African scholar of Christianity. When asked in 1971 about the growing influence of Africa on Christianity, he offered a pungent assessment.
“The days are over when we will be carbon copies of European Christians,” he told The New York Times. “Europe and America westernized Christianity. The Orthodox easternized it. Now it’s our turn to Africanize it.”
He taught at Makerere until 1974, when he was hired as director of the influential World Council of Churches Bossey Ecumenical Institute, in Bogis-Bossey, Switzerland. While there, he became known for organizing conferences on intercultural theology.
The Rev. Dr. Olav Fykse Tveit, a Norwegian theologian who is the council’s general secretary, said on its website that Mr. Mbiti would be remembered for his “sense of justice for indigenous peoples” and for bringing “African theology into global ecumenical theology.”
He left the council in the early 1980s and became a parish minister in Burgdorf for 15 years. He also taught theology at the University of Bern from 1983 to 2003.
After Mr. Mbiti’s death, President Uhuru Kenyatta of Kenya said: “We’ve lost a great Kenyan. He was a role model and an ambassador of the Kenyan brand abroad.”
Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, wrote on Twitter, “Thanks be to God for the life, scholarship and witness of a key father of African theology.”
In addition to his wife and his daughter Maria, Mr. Mbiti is survived by two other daughters, Esther and Kavata Mbiti; a son, Kyeni; five grandchildren; his sisters, Meliki Mbithe and Margret Mwangangi, and his brothers, Mailu Mutuvi and Lenah John.
In 2014, after several years of work, Mr. Mbiti completed his translation of the New Testament from the original Greek into his local language, Kamba. The project started as a hobby but became essential reading for schoolchildren and others in Kenya.
“When I compared the existing Kamba Bible version of the New Testament with the Greek text, I noted more than 1,000 mistakes,” he told The Daily Nation, a Kenyan newspaper, in 2015. “This prompted me to begin the work of correcting the gaps by translating the Bible into my mother tongue.” 
