Facing an avalanche of criticism over the fires raging across the Amazon, President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil pledged in a televised address on Friday that his government would take a “zero tolerance” approach to environmental crimes. 
But that position is at odds with Mr. Bolsonaro’s own track record on safeguarding his country’s environment. Since taking office, he has worked relentlessly and unapologetically to roll back enforcement of Brazil’s once-strict environmental protections.
More broadly, Mr. Bolsonaro has championed industries that want greater access to protected areas of the Amazon, sought to weaken the land rights of Indigenous people and scaled back efforts to combat illegal logging, ranching and mining.
But last week, a surge in fires in the Amazon set off a wave of international outrage, with politicians, celebrities and protesters raising the alarm. It soon became clear that Brazil stood to lose mightily if Mr. Bolsonaro did not take action to protect the forest: European leaders said they might walk away from a trade deal struck in June and calls to boycott Brazilian products were gaining traction on social media. 
Mr. Bolsonaro felt compelled to dispatch the military to put out blazes — but also rejected millions in aid pledged by the Group of 7 nations to help. Here is a sample of his long history of remarks on Indigenous protections and the environment, which range from dismissive to caustic and crude.
Mr. Bolsonaro has often criticized agencies that enforce environmental laws, and called fines for environmental crimes an “industry” that needs to be abolished.
Last week, in a video broadcast live on Facebook, he chided agents from IBAMA, the main federal agency tasked with enforcing environmental laws, for issuing too many fines.
The agency’s enforcement actions decreased by 20 percent during the first six months of this year, compared with the same period in 2018.
Early last week, Mr. Bolsonaro said he suspected the fires had been set by pro-conservation N.G.O.s, in an effort to undermine him. He provided no evidence to back up the assertion.
Mr. Bolsonaro has been dismissive of the value of conservation efforts, arguing that environmental regulations should be relaxed to spur economic growth.
This month, when Germany announced it would halt spending from its $39 million fund for conservation efforts in Brazil, Mr. Bolsonaro said Brazil didn’t need the money. He said he had “a message to dear Madam Angela Merkel,” referring to Germany’s chancellor.
When a reporter asked Mr. Bolsonaro in early August if economic growth and sustainable development could coexist, the president responded with a crude remark, saying that all people had to do was defecate “every other day, and you will really make everyone’s life better that way.”
Mr. Bolsonaro also recently announced that a sliver of coastline in Rio de Janeiro, a region in his home state that is currently a wildlife reserve, could lose that designation and be developed into a “Brazilian Cancun.”
When asked about the consequences of such a venture, Mr. Bolsonaro said that environmental issues mattered solely to “vegans, who only eat vegetables.”
 [Brazil’s environmental workers have come out against Mr. Bolsonaro as the Amazon burns.]
The president has also argued that ecological reserves “hinder development,” and said that there should be fewer national parks.
When Mr. Bolsonaro was a federal lawmaker in the 1990s, he said he admired the ruthlessness with which the American cavalry fought Native Americans during the expansion of the United States.
“The Brazilian cavalry was very incompetent,” Mr. Bolsonaro said. 
Mr. Bolsonaro has been a longtime critic of the land demarcation process established by the 1988 Constitution, which set aside large areas of the country as Indigenous reserves. Last year, Mr. Bolsonaro called those territories anachronistic, adding:
Indigenous people in Brazil are not required to live in reservations, but many feel strongly that doing so is the only way to preserve their culture and heritage.
Soon after taking office, Mr. Bolsonaro vowed he would not sign off on any new land demarcations for Indigenous people. He has argued instead that Indigenous people are eager to make money off their land.
In a meeting this week with governors from Brazil’s nine states in the Amazon region, he said of Indigenous people:
At the same gathering, Mr. Bolsonaro referred to the designation of Indigenous territory as an “industry” that needed to be stopped, adding: 
