U.S. and India, Wary of China, Agree to Strengthen Military Ties
NEW DELHI — The United States and India signed an agreement Thursday to pave the way for New Delhi to buy advanced American weaponry and to share sensitive military technology, strengthening their military partnership as both powers warily eye the rise of China.
“Today’s fruitful discussion illustrated the value of continued cooperation between the world’s two largest democracies,” said Jim Mattis, the United States defense secretary, at a news conference on Thursday after the agreement was signed. “We will work together for a free and prosperous Indo-Pacific.”
The countries also promised to hold joint land, sea and air military exercises in India next year. In the past, they have held joint exercises outside the country.
But despite the friendly handshakes and flattering remarks exchanged as Mr. Mattis and Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, met with their counterparts in New Delhi on Wednesday and Thursday, the two countries remain deeply skeptical of each other.
The United States is worried about how willing India will be to openly counter China as the Chinese expand their influence in the waters between the Indian and Pacific Oceans. It is also unhappy about India’s reluctance to cut trade relations with Iran.
India views the Trump administration as erratic, and it is troubled by the United States’ recent barriers to trade, which threaten to impose tariffs on Indian goods and force New Delhi to import more American products.
Still, the agreement won praise.
“This is a huge deal,” said Rudra Chaudhuri, a senior lecturer at King’s College, London. “In one sense, it makes clear that the wind in the U.S.-India sail is strong, whatever differences there might be.”
The Indian and American defense secretaries, he said, have pulled off a big accomplishment “at a time the Trump White House remains committed to undermining the United States’ global partnerships.”
India is critical to the United States’ new “Indo-Pacific” strategy — formerly known as “Asia-Pacific” — which aims to curb the growing influence of China’s navy in the region by elevating New Delhi as a cornerstone of future military cooperation.
Although India is worried about China’s growing influence in the region — the two militaries engaged in a tense standoff over a disputed border region last year — New Delhi prefers to avert confrontation with Beijing when it can. That reluctance may stymie Washington’s plans for India to be a linchpin of its efforts to counter China, American officials worry.
India’s military budget this year is $45 billion, while China’s is $175 billion. India has 18 submarines in service; China has 78.
New Delhi has been alarmed by the growing presence of Chinese submarines in its traditional sphere of influence, and as Beijing strikes seaport deals with countries encircling India. Western and Indian diplomats worry China may turn these seaports, currently used for commercial purposes, into calling docks for Beijing’s navy by leveraging the enormous debt of countries it has lent money to across the region.
The goal of the trip by the American delegation this week was to smooth over the ability of the United States and India to cooperate militarily. Under the pact signed by the two countries, the Communication Compatibility and Security Agreement, the United States will transfer high-tech communications platforms to India. Until now, the countries have communicated over open radio channels.
“The defense cooperation has emerged as the most significant dimension of our strategic partnership and as a key driver of our overall bilateral relationship,” India’s defense minister, Nirmala Sitharaman, said at the news conference Thursday, sitting with Mr. Mattis and Mike Pompeo.
American sanctions on Russia and Iran also loomed over the meetings, as both countries have major deals and economic ties with India.
Earlier this year, President Trump scrapped the Iran nuclear deal and reinstated sanctions on the country, which currently supplies roughly 20 percent of India’s oil needs. Indian businesses also have deep ties in Iran.
Mr. Trump has given allies a November deadline to stop trading with Iran or also face sanctions, but Indian officials have said they would ignore the threats and continue buying Iranian oil. Earlier this week, Mr. Pompeo acknowledged that Iran would feature in the negotiations in New Delhi, but said they would be a minor part of discussions.
India is also set to buy a Russian antiaircraft missile system, the S-400 Triumf, a $6 billion deal that violates sanctions that Congress imposed earlier this year on Russia.
American officials have indicated they may overlook the purchase, but they remain irked by New Delhi’s reliance on Russian defense equipment, which makes up the bulk of India’s military hardware.
Washington has tried to increase its military sales to New Delhi over the years. Sales have gone from nearly zero a decade ago to an estimated $18 billion next year.
