Award-Winning Journalism for Globally Minded Australians
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insight on Australia and the global stories that matter most in this weekly newsletter. Want to receive it by email? Sign up here.
______
Every April, the entire New York Times newsroom gathers together for the announcement of the Pulitzer Prizes. They’re the Oscars of journalism (or at least that’s how we explained it to our children), and in my 13 years at The Times, there’s never been a year that we didn’t win at least one.
Tallies aside, I’m always inspired by the variety of coverage that gets the nod. There are simply so many different kinds of journalists and so many different ways to create memorable, impactful journalism — as evidenced by this year’s winners, and those of the past.
I actually went back and read quite a few of our archival winners this week, which was both inspiring and humbling. Below you’ll find a selection of recent and still relevant winners that I handpicked based on what I admired most and what I think you’d enjoy reading.
But before we get all archival, it’s worth highlighting this year’s winners — some of whom can be seen celebrating in the photo below.
Here are The New York Times projects that won Pulitzers this year, with links to the winning coverage:
• The New York Times staff, in public service, for its coverage of sexual harassment in the workplace. 
By revealing secret settlements, persuading victims to speak and bringing powerful men to account, New York Times journalists and editors (mostly women) spurred a worldwide reckoning about sexual abuse that only seems to be growing.
The prize was shared with Ronan Farrow of The New Yorker.
• The New York Times staff, in national reporting, for coverage of the Trump team’s connections with the Russians and its attempts to sway James Comey, F.B.I. director. 
The reporting triggered the appointment of Robert Mueller as special counsel.
The Washington Post shared the prize for its own outstanding coverage of President Trump.
• The writer Jake Halpern and the illustrator Michael Sloan for “Welcome to the New World,” their cartoon about a Syrian family’s journey to America. 
This emotionally powerful series, told in graphic narrative form, chronicled the daily struggles of a real-life family of refugees and its fear of deportation.
This was our first Pulitzer in the editorial cartooning category.
In all, The Times has now won 125 Pulitzer Prizes since the first one was awarded 100 years ago.
Now for a roundup of earlier winners.
As always, feedback is welcome. Join our Facebook group for more discussion. Email us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
And if you like this newsletter, forward it to your friends and tell them to sign up!
______
David Barboza’s coverage of corruption at high levels of the Chinese government, including billions in secret wealth owned by relatives of the prime minister, exposed secrets that Chinese officials preferred to keep hidden.
His work was published in the face of heavy pressure from the Chinese officials. It won the Pulitzer in international reporting in 2013.
______
Daniel Berehulak, a photographer born and raised in Sydney who works with The New York Times all over the world, won the Pulitzer for breaking news photography last year for his coverage of the Philippines.
The judges praised his work for “showing the callous disregard for human life in the Philippines brought about by a government assault on drug dealers and users.”
It was Daniel’s second Pulitzer. He also won in 2015 for his courageous photographs of the Ebola epidemic in West Africa.
(I don’t know what it is, but we seem to have quite a few talented Australian photographers among our ranks.)
______
C.J. Chivers is a veteran of the United States Marine Corps who has been covering conflict since 9/11. So much of his work is memorable, but his profile of an American sniper named Sam Siatta is what won him the Pulitzer for feature writing.
Veterans of any war, from any country, will connect with the powerful accounting of Mr. Siatta’s descent into violence after fighting in Afghanistan, reflecting neither the actions of a simple criminal nor a stereotypical case of PTSD.
Our coverage of Afghanistan was also the subject of two other Pulitzers: Barry Bearak won in 2002 for “his deeply affecting and illuminating coverage of daily life,” and John F. Burns won in 1997 for his haunting coverage of the Taliban.
______
The explanatory category of the Pulitzers ranges widely year to year, but we’ve had several winners who won the award for coverage of science and technology.
Among my favorites: Amy Harmon won in 2008 for her series, The DNA Age, which explored the impact of new genetic technology on how we live.
Michael Moss won two years later for a project about meat and food safety.
And in 2013, a team of reporters in China and the United States won for their penetrating look into business practices by Apple and other technology companies that illustrated the darker side of a changing global economy.
______
Wesley Morris (who will be in Australia next month) won a Pulitzer for his inventive movie reviews before we managed to hire him from The Boston Globe, but whatever, we still count that one now that we’ve got him!
More recently, his profile of Jordan Peele is worth a read. And of course, you should listen to the podcast he hosts with Jenna Wortham each week, “Still Processing,” for some of the smartest discussion of culture and identity around.
______
I just did a lot of recommending so I’ll keep this short: Go see Wesley and Jenna while they’re in Australia. Hopefully many of you already have tickets, but here are a few dates (there will be others) to keep in mind:
• In Brisbane, they’re at Powerhouse on May 1.
• In Melbourne, they’re at the Wheeler Center on May 2.
• In Sydney, they’re recording “Still Processing” with an audience on May 4.
And of course, if you get the urge and you’re in Hobart, come see me talk about Australia and the world at the University of Tasmania tonight at 6:30 p.m.
