JAKARTA, Indonesia — Four foreign inmates have escaped from a high-security prison on the Indonesian resort island of Bali after digging a 50-foot tunnel under the prison’s walls, the authorities said on Monday.
Prison guards and local police officers found the tunnel around 8 a.m. local time, leading to a road outside Kerobokan Prison, which houses more than 1,000 inmates, including a large number of foreigners convicted of crimes including murder and drug offenses.
The prison, which is west of Denpasar, the island’s capital, is only a few miles from many of Bali’s internationally famous beaches and resorts.
The police said that the entrance to the tunnel was only 20 by 30 inches. Initially, the authorities thought that as many as seven prisoners had escaped, but a count confirmed that it was only four.
“We immediately started a manhunt,” said Hengky Widjaja, a spokesman for the Bali Provincial Police. He said the four inmates escaped under cover of darkness late Sunday or early Monday.
The fugitives include Shaun Edward Davidson, a 33-year-old Australian from Perth who made headlines in his homeland when he was sentenced to a year in prison in September after being caught using someone else’s passport on the island.
The other escaped inmates are Dimitar Nikolov Iliev, 43, of Bulgaria; Sayed Mohammed Said, 31, of India; and Tee Kok King, 50, of Malaysia, said Syarpani, a spokesman for the government agency that oversees prisons, who like many Indonesians goes by one name.
Mr. Davidson had been set to be released within three months, according to local news reports, raising questions about why he opted to escape.
According to The Sydney Morning Herald, in January 2015 Mr. Davidson was due in court in Perth on charges of possession of methamphetamine and cannabis, and two other offenses. When he didn’t attend, an arrest warrant was issued.
Mr. Davidson fled the country, arriving at Bali’s international airport from Perth.
Mr. Davidson was arrested more than a year later by the Indonesian authorities, who had been looking for him after having received tips that he overstayed his tourist visa and was using false documents, the newspaper reported.
The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said in an email reply to questions that it had been “advised by Indonesian authorities of an alleged escape from Kerobokan Prison of several prisoners, including an Australian man,” but it declined to comment further.
Kerobokan has long had a grim reputation for overcrowding, corrupt guards and facilities below international standards.
Among the prison’s most notable foreign inmates in recent years were members of the so-called Bali Nine group of Australians who were arrested in 2005 trying to smuggle 18.5 pounds of heroin out of the resort island. The group’s two ringleaders, Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran, were executed by firing squad in 2015.
The prison was also home for nearly a decade to Schapelle Corby, an Australian former student beautician who was sentenced to 20 years in 2005 for smuggling nine pounds of marijuana into Bali. Now 39, she was granted parole in 2014, and last month allowed to leave the island and return home.
Monday’s escape was another black eye for Indonesia’s penal system, which has experienced numerous prison escapes and riots over the years because of overcrowding and inadequate conditions, as well as a lack of guards and prison personnel. In May, hundreds of inmates broke out of an overcrowded prison on the island of Sumatra. In June, flooding caused a wall to collapse at a different prison on Sumatra, allowing dozens to escape.
