Trump, Hoping for ‘Great Celebration,’ Wants to Hold North Korea Talks in DMZ
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday fanned expectations for his meeting with Kim Jong-un, saying he would like his talks with the North Korean leader to take place at the Demilitarized Zone that separates the two Koreas because “there’s a great celebration to be had on the site” if the negotiations are successful.
In a sign of his high hopes and grand ambitions for the encounter, Mr. Trump is pushing back against advisers who are proposing more neutral sites, like Singapore. He would prefer to meet at the Peace House, which sits in the two-and-a-half-mile-wide strip of land — ringed by razor wire and heavily armed guard posts — that is one of the Cold War’s last frontiers.
Mr. Trump said he and Mr. Kim could make history on that scarred ground, ending nearly seven decades of military conflict and ridding North Korea of its nuclear arsenal. His enthusiasm has fueled hopes of a genuine breakthrough with one of the world’s most reclusive regimes, even as it has unnerved those who are suspicious of North Korea’s intentions.
At a Rose Garden news conference, Mr. Trump marveled at the recent rush of diplomatic gestures from Mr. Kim, a 34-year-old dictator with whom he was trading threats of nuclear war only four months ago.
Mr. Kim, he said, “has been very open, and very straightforward so far.” He praised Mr. Kim for sticking to a pledge not to test nuclear weapons or ballistic missiles, and for promising to shut down a nuclear site.
“The United States has never been closer to potentially having something happen with respect to the Korean Peninsula, that can get rid of the nuclear weapons, can create so many good things, so many positive things, and peace and safety for the world,” he declared during a joint news conference with the president of Nigeria, Muhammadu Buhari.
Mr. Trump added a familiar caveat that the whole effort could still fall apart. But as talk of a Nobel Peace Prize for the president has begun — stirred both by South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, and by chanting supporters at a weekend rally in Michigan — the president clearly senses that a history-making achievement is within his grasp.
He briskly dismissed a question about whether ripping up the Iran nuclear de
