Judges Split on Whether Cambodia Tribunal Can Pursue Khmer Rouge Commander
BANGKOK — Cambodian and foreign investigating judges issued conflicting rulings on Wednesday on whether a United Nations-backed tribunal, which this month convicted two senior leaders of genocide, should move forward with prosecution of the next potential defendant.
That defendant is Meas Muth, a former Khmer Rouge naval commander, whose potential prosecution has symbolized the tensions between the two parties to the tribunal, which combines Cambodian and international judges and prosecutors.
Under the legal system in which the tribunal operates, investigating judges carry out pretrial investigations and make determinations as to whether cases should proceed against potential defendants.
The Cambodian side has long insisted that prosecutions should end after the completion of the cases against the last two defendants, Nuon Chea, the chief Khmer Rouge ideologue, and Khieu Samphan, the nominal head of state, who were convicted of genocide on Nov. 16.
After their conviction, Deputy Prime Minister Sar Kheng said that “there are no more defendants” and that “the process has ended.”
However, the international side has argued that prosecutions should not be limited and should be allowed to proceed as the evidence warrants.
This tension is at the heart of criticism by some trial analysts that the government of Prime Minister Hun Sen exerts undue influence in limiting prosecutions.
At least 1.7 million people died during the Khmer Rouge rule of Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 of execution, starvation, overwork or disease as the radical Communist regime turned the nation into a giant labor camp and devoured itself in widespread purges.
In the ruling on Wednesday, the Cambodian co-investigating judge, You Bunleng, argued that Mr. Meas Muth did not fall under the jurisdiction of the court, which is limited to senior leaders and “those most responsible” for crimes committed during the Khmer Rouge rule.
The international judge, Michael Bohlander of Germany, argued that there was sufficient evidence to indict Mr. Meas Muth in the genocide of the Vietnamese, crimes against humanity, war crimes and homicide.
The split ruling now goes to a special pretrial chamber — which also includes both Cambodian and foreign judges — which was set up to adjudicate conflicts like these. Its ruling will determine whether the case against Mr. Meas Muth moves forward.
According to an earlier submission to the court, Mr. Meas Muth is accused of committing murder, extermination, enslavement, torture and rape and being responsible for forced labor and forced marriage.
His lawyer, Ang Udom, told reporters: “Meas Muth is now 80 years old. His health is fine. He is living in Battambang Province like an ordinary elderly man.”
In more than a decade of its existence, the court has convicted just three Khmer Rouge figures.
The two found guilty of genocide this month, Mr. Nuon Chea and Mr. Khieu Samphan, can still appeal their convictions. They have now been sentenced to life in prison in two separate proceedings on different charges.
One other defendant, Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch, a prison commander, was convicted in 2010 of crimes against humanity and sentenced to life in prison.
Last year, the court dropped charges against Im Chaem, a former Khmer Rouge district secretary, ruling that she did not fall under the court’s jurisdiction.
Ieng Sary, the former Khmer Rouge foreign minister, and his wife Ieng Thirith, the former social affairs minister, were brought to trial along with Mr. Nuon Chea and Mr. Khieu Samphan, but died during the proceedings. The top Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot, died in 1998.
