Hong Kong, 20 Years After the Handover
China’s president, Xi Jinping, swore in Hong Kong’s new leader, Carrie Lam, on Saturday as he wrapped up his visit to the city to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the former British colony’s return to Chinese rule.
■ During his visit, Mr. Xi described Hong Kong as a place that “always affected my heart.” He also acknowledged “new problems” confronting the “one country, two systems” arrangement that promised Hong Kong civil liberties and its own judicial system for 50 years.
■ Some pro-democracy demonstrators were arrested on Wednesday, including Joshua Wong, a leader of the 2014 street demonstrations that shut down parts of the city for months. Larger protests are expected to be held Saturday afternoon.
Pro-democracy protesters gathered around Hong Kong’s Victoria Park Saturday afternoon in what was expected to be the largest demonstration during this week’s commeration of the 20th anniversary of Britain’s handover of the city to China.
Chanting “down with the Communist Party,” the protesters staged their rally just after Mr. Xi left the city following a three-day visit that included his swearing-in Saturday of Hong Kong’s new chief executive, Carrie Lam.
For updates on the protest and Mr. Xi’s day, read the coverage by Austin Ramzy, the Times reporter at the scene of the demonstration.
Mrs. Lam was sworn in Saturday as Hong Kong’s chief executive, becoming its first female leader and the fourth person to hold the top government post since China regained control of the former British colony in 1997.
She was previously the top deputy to Leung Chun-ying, the unpopular chief executive who chose not to seek a second term.
Mrs. Lam was sworn in by Mr. Xi on his final day of a three-day visit to mark the 20th anniversary of Hong Kong’s return to Chinese control. Mr. Xi said the “one country, two systems” model, under which the city maintains autonomy in local governance and its legal system, economic and financial system, is confronting “new situations” and “new problems.” He pledged the central government’s continuing support to Hong Kong.
The ceremony, in a large convention center along Victoria Harbor, came hours before thousands of demonstrators planned to gather for an annual march to protest the lack of full democracy in Hong Kong.
— Austin Ramzy
Mr. Xi visited a People’s Liberation Army base on Friday in the New Territories of Hong Kong, reviewing troops as he rode in the back of a military jeep, highlighting the most potent symbol of Chinese sovereignty in the territory. It was the largest such military display by Chinese soldiers in Hong Kong since they arrived 20 years ago.
When Britain handed Hong Kong back to China on July 1, 1997, 4,000 People’s Liberation Army soldiers crossed the border in boats, aircraft and armored personnel carriers to establish control. It was just eight years after soldiers killed hundreds of protesters in Beijing during the crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protest movement. While some Hong Kong residents welcomed the military with garlands and waving flags, others said they were worried.
In the two decades since, China’s military has maintained a largely symbolic presence in Hong Kong. Troops are seldom seen in uniform off base, and visiting sailors from the United States and other navies are far more conspicuous on the streets of Hong Kong during port calls.
The Chinese military is expected to take on a more prominent role in Hong Kong. This month Yuan Yubai, the commanding officer of China’s southern military command, and Wei Liang, the political commissar, wrote in a leading Communist Party journal that the Hong Kong garrison should move beyond its symbolic function.
“The garrison will always declare sovereignty as its first and fundamental task,” they wrote in Qiu Shi, or Seeking Truth. But it must change “from being a good model to a force that has the ability to win battles.”
A powerful display of the military’s presence will come in just over one week, when China’s first aircraft carrier, the Liaoning, will visit Hong Kong as part of events to mark the 20th anniversary of the handover.
— Austin Ramzy
The highlight of Mr. Xi’s visit was Saturday, when he swore in Mrs. Lam as Hong Kong’s new chief executive. Mrs. Lam, 60, was elected to a five-year term in March by a committee of just under 1,200 people, most of them with close ties to Beijing. She was seen as Beijing’s preferred candidate, even though she trailed in Hong Kong public opinion polls.
As chief secretary, Mrs. Lam was second in command under the current chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, who is widely unpopular. Mrs. Lam led the effort to make Beijing-approved changes to Hong Kong’s election laws, which became the subject of monthslong protests in 2014 and were never carried out.
Though Mrs. Lam, Hong Kong’s first female chief executive, had promised to bring in fresh faces to run Hong Kong, her cabinet members are almost all veteran officials or holdovers from the previous administration, including the top three secretaries.
Mrs. Lam has said that few of her constituents support calls for Hong Kong’s independence, and she has drawn criticism for suggesting that children should be taught the phrase “I am Chinese” starting in kindergarten and learn more Chinese history. Polls show that most Hong Kong residents see themselves as Hong Kongers first, instead of Chinese.
— Jennifer Jett 
Mr. Xi and his wife, Peng Liyuan, arrived in Hong Kong shortly after noon on Thursday, disembarking from an Air China jet. They strolled down a red carpet, where they were greeted by the city’s departing chief executive, Mr. Leung; the incoming one, Mrs. Lam; and the city’s first one, Tung Chee-hwa, who was bestowed with the title after the resumption of Chinese rule in 1997.
As attendees waved the red flags of Hong Kong and China, Mr. Xi spoke briefly about the importance of the city to China.
“Hong Kong has always affected my heart,” he said. “In two days, it will be the 20th anniversary of Hong Kong’s return to the motherland. This is a major event, a happy event, for the nation and for Hong Kong.”
Saying that he was happy to be in Hong Kong for the first time in nine years, Mr. Xi added that he hoped to experience the changes and development that have occurred in Hong Kong since his last visit.
Reporters on the tarmac shouted questions to Mr. Xi about Chinese rule and whether the Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo, who was recently moved from prison in northeast China to a hospital for cancer treatment, would be released. Mr. Xi did not respond.
Later in the afternoon, Mr. Xi met with Mr. Leung and praised his work over the past five years, particularly in “defending national sovereignty and security.”
Mr. Leung was the target of fierce criticism during the Umbrella Movement protests in 2014, and many demonstrators called for his resignation. Mr. Leung refused and said at the time that the protests were aided by “external forces,” but he did not offer evidence.
— Austin Ramzy
When Mrs. Lam gives her inaugural address Saturday after her swearing-in as Hong Kong’s new chief executive, people will not only be paying attention to what she says, but what language she says it in.
Cantonese is the common tongue in Hong Kong. During the British era, English was the second language. But since the handover the use of Mandarin, the official language of China, has grown steadily. A decade ago, it was rare to hear Mandarin on the streets of Hong Kong. Now, with the influx of mainland tourists, it is common.
Mandarin is increasingly important for people who work in sales, financial services and tourism. It is also important for officials, particularly the chief executive, Hong Kong’s top official. The chief executive answers to Beijing and must be able to communicate with central government leaders. That has been on display during Mr. Xi’s visit, as Mrs. Lam and the departing chief executive, Mr. Leung, have spoken with the Chinese president in Mandarin throughout his visit.
The swearing-in of Hong Kong’s chief executive is done in Mandarin, but the inauguration speeches have typically been done in both Mandarin and Cantonese. Five years ago Mr. Leung gave his speech solely in Mandarin, which ignited some criticism here. Mrs. Lam has not signaled yet what her plans are.
While the two tongues sound different, in formal writing they are very similar. But Cantonese has some characters that do not exist in standard Mandarin.
Mainland China uses simplified forms of Chinese characters, while Hong Kong and Taiwan use traditional characters. The traditional characters involve more strokes, and China’s ruling Communist Party pushed the use of simplified characters to increase literacy.
A fireworks display planned for Saturday will include simplified characters for the word “China,” a move that has been widely criticized here. One explanation is that the display is meant for mainland Chinese audiences. Another, as The South China Morning Post recently reported, is that the simplified character for “country” is easier to render in fireworks than the traditional.
— Austin Ramzy
Mr. Xi is encountering something he rarely confronts in China: open protests. Because of its status as a semiautonomous region, Hong Kong has long allowed demonstrations, which are not tolerated in mainland China. To that end, the police have taken pains to keep protesters away from Mr. Xi’s scheduled public appearances. Roads will be closed on Saturday in the busy Wan Chai and Admiralty areas as he presides over the swearing-in of Hong Kong’s new chief executive.
The local news media reported that roughly a third of Hong Kong’s 29,000-member police force would be deployed to protect the president, his wife and the events at which they appear. But Mr. Xi’s personal security will be handled by Troop 8341, according to The South China Morning Post, which noted that the elite, secretive unit was composed of combat-ready troops.
In a video posted this week, the Hong Kong police sought to justify the extraordinary lengths to which they have gone to shield Chinese and local officials from planned protests.
The police said the security measures reflected their concerns over terrorist attacks.
“Recently, the world has been shocked by terrorist attacks of cars plowing into crowds,” an officer said in the video. “These ‘water barriers’ can ensure the safety of the public and the important officials.”
But the barriers are more likely meant to shield the leaders from expected protests. “Does that mean that all the people of Hong Kong are terrorists?” one Facebook user commented.
— Gerry Mullany
On the eve of Hong Kong’s handover 20 years ago, residents who did not want to live under Chinese rule tended to relocate to the United States, Australia or Canada. But now Taiwan is becoming a top choice amid concern over China’s dominance of Hong Kong and political turmoil in the territory.
The Liberty Times, a newspaper in Taiwan, this week cited a survey taken late last year by the Hong Kong Institute of Asia-Pacific Studies in which nearly 40 percent of respondents from Hong Kong said they wanted to emigrate. Taiwan topped the respondents’ wish list as a destination, with 16 percent saying they would like to move there, followed by Australia and Canada, with 15 and 14 percent, respectively.
“Political climate is one of the important factors for Hong Kongers immigrating to Taiwan, especially for young people hoping for stability of free speech,” the Liberty Times said. Cultural similarities between Hong Kong and Taiwan and physical proximity were also important draws.
Chen Tuen Yee, a Hong Kong native, moved to Taiwan in 2015 after the pro-democracy Umbrella Movement demonstrations failed to bring change.
After the movement ended, Ms. Chen said, “I started to pay more attention to politics, and it was absolutely frustrating.”
Having considered several options, she chose Taiwan because “it was more culturally suited to me, closer to home, and, in the end, they’re fighting the same battle that we are.” Self-ruled Taiwan, which China seeks to annex, has recently edged away from its closer ties to Beijing with last year’s election of Tsai Ing-wen as president.
— Chris Horton
Mr. Wong, perhaps the best-known leader of the pro-democracy Umbrella Movement, and more than two dozen other activists were arrested Wednesday night and remained in police custody until Friday.
They were arrested after climbing the Golden Bauhinia Statue commemorating Hong Kong’s return to Chinese rule. The statue is in the square where the Chinese president will attend a flag-raising ceremony on Saturday.
The protesters called for the immediate release of Mr. Liu.
“Genuine universal suffrage! Free Liu Xiaobo unconditionally!” they chanted as hundreds of mostly mainland Chinese tourists looked on.
Shocked by the display of defiance — such free expression is severely restricted in mainland China — many tourists immediately took out their phones to take photographs and videos, even though many had never heard of Mr. Liu.
“Who is Liu Xiaobo?” a woman from Anhui Province, in east-central China, asked when I approached her. “This is so scary.”
— Alan Wong
“China Resumes Control of Hong Kong,” The New York Times announced on its front page on July 1, 1997, with another three pages of coverage inside. The reporter Edward A. Gargan described the painstakingly negotiated ceremony for the transfer of sovereignty, attended by Prince Charles and President Jiang Zemin of China:
Nicholas D. Kristof considered how mainland China would be shaped by the return: “Most analysts predict that China in 20 years’ time will look more like Hong Kong today than Hong Kong will look like China today.”
— Jennifer Jett
The Basic Law, an agreement signed 20 years ago by Britain and China, says that Hong Kong will retain a high degree of autonomy, and its capitalist financial system and independent legal structure, for 50 years.
Critics say that in recent years Beijing has been undermining the spirit if not the letter of the Basic Law by cracking down on press freedoms in Hong Kong and meddling in the selection of the territory’s leaders.
Here is the text of the Basic Law governing Beijing’s relationship to Hong Kong, which says the territory “will enjoy a high degree of autonomy, except in foreign and defense affairs which are the responsibilities of the Central People’s Government.”
— Gerry Mullany

