A Canadian Food Fest and Toronto’s Islands  the Canada Letter.
I tagged along on a Times Food section roadshow to Toronto and Montreal this week that allowed me to meet several newsletter readers and enjoy two fine dinners, including one at Joe Beef which although it’s one of the smallest restaurants in Canada, it’s perhaps best known one in Canada. Sam Sifton, the food editor, offers his impressions of the trip:
Nearly 300 people showed up in Montreal and about 500 in Toronto. I certainly share Sam’s observations about the crowds’ passion. Five times a week, Sam sends out newsletters with suggestions of what to cook in the coming days as well as his take on music, film, books and whatever strikes his fancy. If you don’t subscribe, you should sign up here.
We’ll be holding more events in Canada (and, yes, including places outside of Ontario and Quebec). Sign up here for advance notice of them by email.
As Sam mentioned, the food section this week was all about Canada. It includes the fantastic story of Algonquin chef Cezin Nottaway who was visited by Dan Bilefsky, my Montreal-based colleague, at the Kitigan Zibi reserve. Don’t miss Jasmin Lavoie’s video, which explores Ms. Nottaway’s thoughts about hunting and her prey.
Pete Wells, our restaurant critic, found that Kissa Tanto in Vancouver “conjures an imaginary parallel world.” And wine writer Eric Asimov tells the story of François Morissette who grew up near Montreal, worked in Burgundy and now makes wine in the Niagara Peninsula.
Sam and his group of editors have also pulled various Canadian recipes from The Times’s archives, including one from me.
Read: The Canada Issue
Although I enjoy winter, there have been times over the last few weeks when it has been excessively cold. In Toronto, which usually suffers damp and slushy winters, the deep freeze brought skating to the harbor. Catherine Porter went out on the ice and came back with a charming update about the tiny community on the Toronto Islands, illustrated with remarkable photos by Aaron Vincent Elkaim.
Your comments on the article show that decades after the residents successfully fought to remain on what is otherwise parkland, they still provoke mixed reactions from nonresidents. Some readers view the islanders as charming contributors to Toronto’s fabric. But many others, including “Bruce from Toronto,” see them as “a handful of entitled people who are allowed to essentially squat on prime waterfront acreage in the nation’s largest city.”
Read: Shivering? That’s for City Folk. For Islanders, Ice Time Is Play Time.
Imax, the Canadian creation that came out of Expo 67, remains the biggest thing, screen-wise, in cinema. But before Imax there was Cinerama. I still vividly remember going to Detroit at age 10 with my father to see “Grand Prix” in Cinerama. Previewing a technique that would be widely seen at Expo the film often used multiple images on a divided screen. A new exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York looks at the history of Cinerama, which required three projectors running simultaneously. Only three theaters in the world can still show Cinerama in its full glory.
Read: Long Before Imax, the Curious Tale of Cinerama
Well, the final numbers are in for the challenge to see if readers of this newsletter or the Australia Letter would sign up the highest number of new subscribers. And I’m sorry to report that Damien Cave, the Australia bureau chief, whipped his readers into a frenzy that saw them sign up 1,921 new readers while we only gained 1,334 during the challenge period. I will note, however, that we do have three times more subscribers than the Australia Letter.
So I’m doing penance this weekend by wearing a Team Australia hockey jersey while watching episodes of “Skippy The Bush Kangaroo.” (The Aussie hockey team hasn’t made it to the Olympics since 1960 but who’s counting.)
As for our other contest, there were too many emails during the Commonwealth Challenge period about the newsletter to declare a single one as the best. So I randomly selected three and will be in touch with the winners.
Sarah Murray, the Canadian-born coach of South Korea’s women’s hockey team, faces an unusual challenge now that the two Koreas have agreed to enter a single, unified squad at the Winter Olympics just as they are about to get underway.
—Eleven Canadian cities took up Amazon’s call and pitched themselves as the site of its second headquarters. But only a bid from Toronto and its surrounding region made it to the list of 20 finalists. Toronto biggest asset? Canada’s immigration policies.
—Officials have yet to determine why Dolores O’Riordan, lead singer of the Irish band the Cranberries, died this week in London. Ms. O’Riordan was married to Canadian Don Burton for 20 years and divided her time between Ireland and the cottage country near Peterborough, Ontario.
—For Caribou trapped on an island with predators, “It’s like being confined in a prison cell with someone who’s trying to murder you,” one scientist said. Hence the effort to rescue them on an island in Lake Superior.
