Fugitive Venezuelan Police Officer Is Killed in Shootout
MEDELLÍN, Colombia — Óscar Pérez, a helicopter pilot and former police officer who led an armed rebel band against the isolated and embattled government of Venezuela, was killed in a shootout with security forces, Venezuelan authorities announced on Tuesday, bringing an end to a dramatic event that unfolded a day earlier in videos on social media.
Mr. Pérez, 36, rose to prominence last year as a dissident police officer during street protests against President Nicolás Maduro. In June, he and a small group commandeered a helicopter in the capital, Caracas, and used it to drop grenades onto the Supreme Court building and fire on the Interior Ministry in a brazen midday attack.
Mr. Pérez then unfurled a banner calling on Venezuelans to rebel against Mr. Maduro, to the cheers of protesters below. He later released a video in which he and a band of masked men repeated their calls for a rebellion. While no one was injured in that attack, it was an embarrassment for the government, and officials vowed to capture him.
He had been a fugitive — and an online nuisance to the government — ever since, posting videos urging Venezuelans to resist what he called Mr. Maduro’s tyrannical government.
Mr. Pérez posted videos of himself early Monday, with blood dripping across his face, holed up in a house under fire. He shouted that the group wished to surrender, but that the police outside were set on killing them.
“I want to ask Venezuela not to lose heart — fight, take to the streets,” he said. “It is time for us to be free, and only you have the power now.”
On Tuesday, the Venezuelan interior and justice minister, Néstor Reverol, said Mr. Pérez was among seven dead, whom he called “insurgents and terrorists.” Two police officers were killed and five were injured, the authorities said.
Mr. Reverol said that troops had arrested six people identified as members, collaborators and financiers of Mr. Pérez’s group. They also confiscated rifles, military uniforms, ammunition and smoke grenades.
He offered few details on the capture on Tuesday other than saying that the tip as to the whereabouts of Mr. Pérez and his band had come from politicians during talks between the government and Venezuela’s opposition parties.
“During the dialogue for peace, some political leaders gave important information about the alleged location of the terrorist group where Óscar Pérez was,” Mr. Reverol said.
No politicians came forward to say they had provided information to Mr. Reverol on the group. Henrique Capriles, a former governor and top opposition leader, criticized the government for its assault against the rebels.
“What we’ve seen in several videos and broadcast on social networks are absolutely abominable, Dantesque incidents, which show there was an execution we must condemn because there was no due process,” Mr. Capriles told the Venezuelan radio network Union Radio.
Photographs of bodies believed to be those of the rebels have circulated on social media sites since Monday, said to have been leaked from the scene of the battle. In one, a man who appears to be Mr. Pérez lies face up, covered in blood as officials in dress shirts stand in the background.
It was the end of a dramatic day that began with a series of videos posted on Twitter that showed Mr. Pérez bloodied and besieged.
“They don’t want us to surrender, they want us dead!” he said.
Over the course of hours, Mr. Pérez continued to post video updates online while his band fought from behind refrigerators and filing cabinets as the security forces closed in. As the videos progressed, the men looked increasingly weary and said they wanted to surrender.
In one video, Mr. Pérez turned the camera outside, where government officials could be seen calling up to him.
“We’re not criminals,” he told them. “We’re patriots who are fighting for our convictions.”
Mr. Pérez had been one of the more improbable figures to emerge from last year’s political turmoil in Venezuela. A police officer who had once starred in a low-budget action movie about a crime squad, he was now a real-life version of the character he had portrayed.
After appearing in public during an antigovernment rally in July, Mr. Pérez largely disappeared from public view. While some members of the security forces staged rebellions of their own in the time afterward, top military officials stayed loyal to Mr. Maduro’s government. Mr. Pérez’s abandoned helicopter was found by the government shortly after the June attack.
Perhaps most demoralizing to Mr. Pérez and his followers was the disbanding of street protests against Mr. Maduro that took place after the president consolidated power by dissolving the opposition-controlled Congress and establishing a new one packed with loyalists.
