   The “Veep” administration is preparing to leave office — with the glass ceiling shattered and Selina Meyer clawing her way back to the top. 
   The HBO series’ seventh and final season kicks off Sunday, seeing former President Selina Meyer (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) reinvigorated to take another stab at the presidency despite the countless issues she’ll have to combat in order to get there. 
   One such issue is, of course, her new and unexpected competition, former White House liaison Jonah Ryan (Timothy Simons) alongside Selina’s former running mate, Tom James (Hugh Laurie). Multiple shootings haven’t marred Selina’s vigor. Rather, she hopes to wield the atrocities to play in her favor. Amy (Anna Chlumsky) and Dan (Reid Scott) may have conceived a child, but their dynamic remains taut and antagonistic. Selina does away with the bit of political correctness she’s held onto, substituting it for vitriol remnant of the actual resident at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave. 
   Oh, what a strange journey it’s been — in fictional and real-life Washington. 
   When the hit comedy premiered in 2012, Barack Obama had just begun his second term in office and the show’s discombobulated political landscape seemed a far-cry from our own. “Veep” was, after all, created by Armando Iannucci as the American incarnation of his similarly outlandish British political sitcom, “The Thick of It.” 
   The show has featured caricatures of people in power, from Selina herself to her right-hand woman, Amy, her body man, Gary Walsh (Tony Hale), and her Director of Communications Mike McLintock (Matt Walsh). Every member of the staff is an agent of never-ending chaos, bearing a striking resemblance to America’s current climate. 
   The series, which began as wholly satirical, now reads less as an exaggeration than a reflection of the current American political landscape in which a former reality TV star occupies the White House. What was once an aesthetic escape is starting to shine a light on our country’s recent misdeeds. Failed gun control, #MeToo and white nationalist sentiments are just the tip of the iceberg. 
   In a not-so-subtle nod to President Trump’s administration, current showrunner David Mandel — who took over for Iannucci in Season 5 — acknowledged to Variety the vast differences between when the show first premiered and where society is now. 
   “If you look back at the previous six seasons, so much of the show was, ‘Oh my God, this is what a politician is like behind closed doors.' But those closed doors are gone. So often, it was shocking how incompetent her staff is. Well, turn the TV on and you can see that. So much of the show was often her messing up and then paying a very public price for something, and I’m not sure that exists either anymore. So a lot of our bread and butter, if you will, it changed.” 
   Rather than take inspiration from the controversial political goings-on, Mandel explained that he and the writers wrote season seven paying less attention to “Oh Trump said this” and more to "how history will judge these years some day.” 
   The season, for instance, finished filming well before the New Zealand mosque massacres, but the threat of white supremacy and nationalism seems to play a part in the remaining plot. Selina mentions “real Americans," a term Mandel maintains is a “horrific statement ... [but] it is also not a new idea." 
   These comments as well as characters “basically being heartless about a shooting” will likely hold new weight in the wake of the attacks, a new risk for a show that has constantly taken them. 
   It was “Veep” that gave America a glimpse at what life could look like under a female president. The show has never shied away from putting the characters in situations that threaten to make viewers uncomfortable or have us question our own limits — from the perception of women in power to the season 2 hostage crisis, controversial jokes, and even issues that plague the country today (such as Roe v. Wade). 
   The series begins with Selina serving as Vice President after she loses her party’s presidential nomination. After her running mate, Stuart Hughes, unexpectedly steps down, Selina takes her place in the Oval Office. Selina simultaneously launches her own presidential campaign in an effort to win the 2016 election. Following an unsuccessful presidential bid, season six sees Selina leave office and undertake new projects to cement her legacy. It isn’t long before she decides to give politics another go and run for president once again. 
   To date, “Veep” has garnered 60 awards – including 17 Emmys (6 consecutive wins for Louis-Dreyfus) – and 184 award nominations, including seven Golden Globe nominations. The legacy of “Veep,” and what it’s accomplished, transcends its critical acclaim. 
   The key ingredient is, of course, its star. “Seinfeld” put Louis-Dreyfus on the map as Elaine Benes, the only woman to successfully infiltrate the characters’ boys’ club. It paid off. Louis-Dreyfus nabbed an Emmy, five SAG Awards, and a Golden Globe for her role and went on to helm two more award-winning comedies — “The New Adventures of Old Christine,” and, of course, “Veep.” 
   Unlike other politically-minded series, “Veep” never formally aligns Selina with a particular party. This ambiguity, particularly in such a polarizing real-world political climate, armors the series with the ability to analyze, critique, and hold accountable both the Democratic and Republican parties, making for a more balanced and well-rounded satire. 
   It’s rare that a series so presciently defines the zeitgeist. When “Veep” takes its final bow in seven too-short episodes, it will leave a major gap in the world of sociopolitical comedic commentary, one we will be hard-pressed to fill. 
   “Veep” airs at 10:30 p.m. Sunday on HBO.   
