New Zealand Shooting Suspect Is Charged With 50 Counts of Murder
CHRISTCHURCH, New Zealand — Brenton Harrison Tarrant, the Australian man accused of killing 50 people last month at two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, appeared in court on Friday via video link from prison to face dozens of additional charges.
With the relatives of several victims watching in a Christchurch courtroom — along with wounded survivors, including two men in wheelchairs — Mr. Tarrant was officially charged with 50 counts of murder and 39 charges of attempted murder, as prosecutors added to the solo charge they laid against him in March.
Appearing onscreen from Auckland, handcuffed and wearing a gray shirt, Mr. Tarrant sat still and said nothing.
Judge Cameron Mander of the Christchurch High Court moved quickly through the hearing, the first of several in what could be a process lasting more than a year.
He ordered a pair of health assessments for Mr. Tarrant, 28, with the results due at his next appearance, scheduled for June 14. A plea, the judge said, would follow the results of the assessments.
If Mr. Tarrant is found guilty, he could be sentenced to life in prison without parole. No one in New Zealand has ever received that sentence, but judges have the right to impose it for particularly heinous murders.
New Zealand does not have the death penalty.
Judge Mander also approved several suppression orders that will prevent certain details of the proceedings from being reported by the news media.
The 39 names of victims linked to the attempted murder charges cannot be published, the judge said, to protect them from “undue hardship.” Images of Mr. Tarrant cannot be published without his face being pixelated; no photos, video or audio can be recorded in court.
International news outlets not subject to New Zealand jurisdiction could be barred from Mr. Tarrant’s trial if they do not comply, Judge Mander said.
Mr. Tarrant had previously said he planned to represent himself, but two defense lawyers from Auckland acted on his behalf — Shane Tait and a colleague, Jonathan Hudson.
In a statement on Thursday, Mr. Tait said the right to consult a lawyer, along with the right to a fair trial, were protected under New Zealand law. He said he would not comment further on the case or his role.
Mr. Tarrant’s appearance took place as the New Zealand government has moved quickly to ban military-style weapons and as officials continue to investigate how the gunman was able to carry out the attacks.
The gunman is believed to have posted a hate-filled manifesto online shortly before carrying out the killings, which were then livestreamed on Facebook.
On Thursday, over the objections of technology companies, Australia passed a law requiring social media platforms to quickly remove “abhorrent violent material.” New Zealand is also considering putting restrictions on social media.
