Novichok Was in a Perfume Bottle, U.K. Victim Says
Charlie Rowley does not remember exactly where he picked up the box containing the small glass bottle, but he does recall what was inside. It was definitely not perfume as he had originally supposed, but an oily substance that had very little smell at all.
It was only when he regained consciousness weeks later in a British hospital that the police told him what the substance was: a military-grade nerve agent known as a Novichok that British authorities believe was most likely left behind by Russian assassins.
“I was in complete shock when they told me it was Novichok,” Mr. Rowley said in an interview with the British television channel ITV on Tuesday, his first public remarks since he and his girlfriend, Dawn Sturgess, fell ill on July 1 in the town of Amesbury in southern England. Ms. Sturgess died a week later.
British authorities say the nerve agent is the same substance that was used to poison a former Russian spy, Sergei V. Skripal, and his daughter, Yulia. Investigators believe Mr. Rowley and Ms. Sturgess were most likely exposed accidentally when Mr. Rowley picked up the container it was carried in and took it home.
In the interview, Mr. Rowley, who was released from the hospital last week, offered new clues about how Russian agents might have transported the nerve agent. Mr. Rowley said he found the bottle wrapped in cellophane inside a three-by-three-inch box, though he did not say where he had found it. Friends described Mr. Rowley as a “skip diver,” who would rummage through trash bins for valuable items and, occasionally, trinkets he would give to his girlfriend as gifts.
He said some of the liquid spilled into his hands when he tried to put the pump dispenser on the bottle, but he quickly washed it off. For Ms. Sturgess, though, the exposure was more potent.
“I do have a memory of her spraying it on her wrist and I guess rubbing it, rubbing them together,” Mr. Rowley said. “I think within 15 minutes I believe Dawn said that she felt she had a headache.”
After that, Mr. Rowley said, Ms. Sturgess deteriorated quickly.
“She asked me if I had any headache tablets,” he said. “I had a look around the flat and within that time she said she felt peculiar and needed to lie down in the bath, which at the time I thought seemed a bit strange. And then within minutes I went into the bathroom and found her in the bath, fully clothed in the bath, in a very ill state.”
The death of Ms. Sturgess, who was 44, inflamed what was already an intense diplomatic standoff, with Britain accusing Russia of dispatching assassins to Salisbury, a small English city, in a botched attempt to kill a former spy with a highly potent nerve agent that, perhaps inadvertently, poisoned several others. A police officer, Detective Sgt. Nick Bailey, was also sickened when he responded to Mr. Skripal’s home in Salisbury.
The latest poisoning raised the prospect that in their haste to flee the area, the would-be assassins simply tossed aside a top secret, Soviet-designed weapon that the British authorities, despite a cleanup operation that lasted weeks, failed to discover.
“I think it’s very irresponsible for people to leave the poison, you know, for anybody to pick up,” Mr. Rowley said. “It could have been children or anything. It was just so unfortunate. I’m just very angry.”
Four and half months after Mr. Skripal and his daughter were poisoned, the authorities have begun to zero in on possible suspects. Using surveillance camera footage, airline passenger data and facial recognition software, British investigators have identified at least two people who flew into London shortly before the Skripals were sickened on March 4 and left immediately after, said a person briefed on the investigation, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss its details. The names the suspects used to enter the country are also known, though it is possible they used aliases, the person said.
British authorities believe that the suspects were probably current agents or veterans of the same military intelligence agency, widely known as the G.R.U., that once employed Mr. Skripal. Long known as a rugged battlefield intelligence service, the G.R.U. in recent years has been involved in more unconventional missions, from whipping up ethnic tensions in Eastern Europe to helping to seize territory in Ukraine and Syria.
In an indictment released by the Justice Department this month, 12 Russian intelligence officers from that agency were accused of hacking into the computer systems of the Democratic National Committee and Hillary Clinton’s campaign in an effort, officials said, to disrupt the 2016 presidential election in the United States.
Russia has categorically denied any involvement in either the Skripal case or the election interference. In their one-on-one meeting in Finland this month, President Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said they had discussed the election meddling. Mr. Putin even offered to allow American prosecutors to sit in on interrogations of the 12 intelligence officers charged in the case. But in exchange he asked that Russian investigators be allowed to interrogate William F. Browder, a vociferous Kremlin critic, and Michael A. McFaul, a former American ambassador to Moscow, among others.
It was unclear, though, whether the two leaders discussed the Skripal case, which prompted the Trump administration to expel from the United States 60 Russian diplomats believed to have been working undercover as spies, by far the most expulsions of Russian officials by any country.
Even if suspects are identified in the Skripal case it is unlikely that the British will ever prosecute them. After the 2006 death of Alexander V. Litvinenko, the last known former Russian intelligence operative to be poisoned on British soil, British officials tried in vain to get their hands on the two prime suspects, Andrei K. Lugovoi, a former K.G.B. bodyguard, and Dmitri V. Kovtun, a Red Army deserter. Despite volumes of evidence, including a trail of radioactive polonium that investigators were able to trace practically to Moscow, Russia refused to hand over the two men. Mr. Lugovoi later became a member of Parliament, giving him immunity from prosecution at home.
Another lingering mystery in the Skripal case is motive. As many skeptics of Russia’s involvement point out, any information Mr. Skripal possessed from his time with the G.R.U. was dated, and it is unknown whether he had access to new intelligence from the agency. He retired from the G.R.U. in 1999 and was arrested by Russian counterintelligence agents in 2004 for espionage. He spent the next six years in prison before suddenly being released early in 2010 as part of a spy swap.
After settling in England, though, Mr. Skripal did not remain idle. He traveled widely, offering briefings on Russian spycraft to foreign intelligence agencies in the Czech Republic, Estonia and possibly others. In one meeting with Czech officials in 2012, he explained to his former foes the intricacies of G.R.U. operations, said a European official with knowledge of the meeting. In the following months, several Russian diplomats were kicked out of the Czech Republic for spying, though the official could not say whether Mr. Skripal’s revelations led to the expulsions.
