Sufi Shrine Bombing in Pakistan Kills at Least 10
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — A bombing outside one of Pakistan’s most revered Sufi shrines killed at least 10 people, including five police officers, and wounded at least 20 other people, officials said, raising new concerns about militant violence targeting a moderate strand of Islam.
The bombing took place Wednesday morning in Lahore, the provincial capital of Punjab, near the shrine of an 11th-century Sufi saint, Abul Hasan Ali Bin Usman, more popularly known as Data Ganj Bakhsh Hajveri. Police officials said it destroyed a van carrying police commandos who were providing security at the shrine.
Investigators were trying to determine who was behind the attack, which they said was a suicide bombing. There was no immediate claim of responsibility.
“There were no specific threat alerts to the shrine, but it is always considered to be a high-security zone,” said Ashfaq Ahmad Khan, the deputy inspector general for operations of the Lahore police.
The bombing broke a brief lull in militant violence in the country. It took place on the second day of Ramadan, the Muslim holy month of fasting. Militants often carry out attacks during the month in the belief that those who die in battle during Ramadan will get more blessings from God in the afterlife.
The shrine, popularly known as Data Darbar, is one of the major monuments and cultural landmarks of Lahore and attracts hundreds of devotees daily. The shrine complex remains busy throughout the day and late evenings as visitors throng it for prayers and alms.
Adherents of Sufi Islam believe in mysticism and nonviolence, and Sufi saints are credited with spreading Islam throughout South Asia. But the Taliban and other Muslim militant groups spurn Sufi shrines and have often attacked Sufi mosques and shrines, accusing devotees of being heretics or apostates.
Punjab’s chief minister, Usman Buzdar, called an emergency meeting to review security measures in the wake of the attack, officials said. The province has been put on high alert.
Video broadcast by local news media showed a person who appeared to be a teenager walking toward the police van. Seconds later, there was a large explosion.
An initial police investigation found that two unidentified men accompanied the bomber, walking with him toward the shrine from a nearby busy street. Then they shook hands with the bomber and disappeared into the neighborhood.
At first, the bomber headed toward one of the entrances to the shrine, the authorities said, but then he took a turn from a small side street and walked up to the police van.
The explosion shook nearby buildings and left a trail of destruction.
In a statement, the United States Embassy in Islamabad strongly condemned the attack.
“Such cowardly attacks stand in stark contrast to the peaceful spirit of Ramadan, and we send our deepest condolences to the victims and their families,” it said.
