Many celebrate Instagram test hiding ‘likes’ on posts — but influencers question how they may be affected
   Whether they "like” it or not, Instagram users’ experience may soon be changing as the social media platform continues to test an update that hides the number of “likes” a post receives. 
   As pressure has increased on social media for many users to have a high number of “likes” on each picture they post, Instagram has begun testing hiding the number that each post receives across certain countries. 
   “We’re running a test in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Ireland, Italy, Japan, and New Zealand that removes the total number of likes on photos and video views in Feed, Permalink pages, and Profile. We are testing this because we want your followers to focus on the photos and videos you share, not how many likes they get,” a spokesperson for Facebook — which owns Instagram — said in an email to the Daily News. 
   Some have celebrated Instagram’s efforts to lessen the pressure of posting and the hard feelings that may come if a person felt their post did not receive enough double-taps — but for influencers, it could mean a potential threat to how they market their content and make money. 
   Michelle Reed, a 21-year-old lifestyle Youtuber with more than 47,000 Instagram followers living in New York, began making videos as a hobby. Her hobby gradually grew into a way to make money as she gained followers and curated beauty and lifestyle content, and often does sponsored posts with brand partners. 
   Reed said she doesn’t feel pressure personally on posts to see how many “likes” each receives — but understands that it can be a struggle for teens and those who grew up with social media. Reed doesn’t think hiding the “likes” will solve the problem, however. 
   “I don’t necessarily think that taking away likes will solve the issue of comparison. It’s a deeply rooted issue that goes farther than displaying a feature or not displaying a feature on an application. It may be a temporary fix, but people will find new ways to compare themselves,” Reed told the Daily News. 
   Reed said as the feature potentially expands, she is unsure how she would be affected as an influencer with brand partnerships, as she often does not see the metrics behind sponsorships that assess if they were successful. 
   “I’m sure brands will just ask influencers for their ‘like’ counts at the end of a campaign. Brands increasingly care more about engagement, meaning how many people both like and comment on your posts. Engagement is a much better indication of how connected your audience is with you. If comments still exist, I think they will become the primary measure of campaign success. And honestly, that’s a good thing! Maybe more authentic influencers will have more brand opportunities,” Reed said. 
   A Facebook spokesperson said they are working on ways for Instagram influencers and partners to engage in the test where the feature no longer shows “likes.” In the test, “likes” are invisible on all content in a user’s feed – including ads. 
   “We understand that likes are an important metric for many creators, and while this test is in exploratory stages, we are thinking through ways for creators to communicate value to their partners,” a Facebook spokesperson told The News. 
   Emily Fedner, a 26-year-old foodie, former line-cook and co-founder of Petite Pasta Joint, a 20-seat pasta-pop up operating out of Raffetto’s Fresh Pasta living in New York, has more than 87,000 Instagram followers. Like Reed, Fedner said she began sharing her love for food on social media and never intended to be an influencer — and still uses Instagram to share cooking and explore different cultures. 
   Fedner feels engagement is an important metric for partnerships and branding, but that “likes” aren’t everything. 
   “[Likes allow] brands and influencers alike to gauge if their content is resonating/reaching people. But with Instagram’s ever-changing algorithm, engagement feels more and more like an arbitrary number. On the daily I see accounts with amazing content receiving sub-par ‘likes’ and that’s super disheartening. I really applaud/support the people who stay true to themselves and what they want to post without becoming a slave to ‘likes,’ " Fedner told The News. 
   She said she has felt the pressure to get a certain number of “likes” on a post, especially with partnerships so she feels like she is doing “justice” to the brand, but doesn’t let it affect what she posts. Fedner said the way brands and influencers work may change if the “likes” disappear on posts. 
   “Lots of brands have begun to prioritize that metric over numbers of followers so without ‘likes’ being publicly visible, there’s a chance brands will revert back to favoring accounts with larger followings,” Fedner told The News. 
   While it may change the way brands and influencers work together, Fedner also hopes it may change the way all users post on Instagram. 
   “I think people will stop playing the numbers game and actually post content that is meaningful to them without the added layer of ‘….but will this do well??’ I hope it challenges everyone to be more creative and consider more important factors regarding their content other than just the potential amount of ‘likes’ it might receive," Fedner said. 
   “Even though... there’s a chance that I personally will NOT benefit from this change, I think it’ll be better for the overall health of the Instagram community and that is why I am here for it.”   
