Tinder’s new ‘Traveler Alert’ protects LGBTQ users in countries where homosexuality is illegal
   Tinder wants to protect its LGBTQ users from potential risks when they swipe into danger. 
   A new security feature is designed to warn users of the dating app giant about the risks faced by LGBTQ people in the dozens of countries that still have laws against same-sex love. 
   As part of the update, called “Traveler Alert,” users who identify as LGBTQ will no longer, by default, appear on Tinder when they open the app in one of 69 countries where being LGBTQ is a crime. 
   If they decide to make their profile public, the app will temporarily remove any sexual orientation or gender identity to their profile to safeguard users from law enforcement and individuals who may target them. 
   Once users have left the country or changed their location, they will appear again in the app. 
   For the “Traveler Alert” update, Tinder partnered with the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association, using data collected and compiled by its annual State-Sponsored Homophobia Report. 
   According to the latest report, which was released in March of 2019, “70 States continue to criminalize same-sex consensual activity. In 44 of these States the law is applied to people regardless of their gender,” Lucas Ramón Mendos, a lawyer and researcher with the organization said in a statement. 
   Since then, Botswana decriminalized homosexual activities, bringing the total to 69 countries where being LGBTQ is a criminal offense. 
   In seven nations, four in Asia (Brunei, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Yemen), and three in Africa (Nigeria, Sudan and Somalia) same-sex acts are punishable by death. In In six other nations, the death penalty for same-sex behavior remains a possibility: Mauritania, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iraq. 
   “We hope that this development will raise awareness amongst all Tinder users, and help protect people of diverse sexual orientations in the 69 countries around the world that currently still criminalize same-sex love,” André du Plessis, executive director at the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association, said in a statement. 
   “We work hard to change practices, laws and attitudes that put LGBTQ people at risk — including the use of dating apps to target our community — but in the meantime, the safety of our communities also depends on supporting their digital safety,” he added. 
   The app, which is available in 190 countries, and in over 40 languages, has recently introduced a feature to give users more ways to express their sexuality. 
   In June, Tinder partnered with GLAAD to introduce “Orientation on Tinder,” a feature that gives swipers nine orientations to choose from. It’s currently present in apps in the U.S., U.K., Canada, Ireland, India, Australia and New Zealand. 
   “We fundamentally believe that everyone should be able to love who they want to love,” Tinder’s CEO Elie Seidman said in a statement. “It is unthinkable that, in 2019, there are still countries with legislation in place that deprives people of this basic right.”   
