Meth or myth  Tennessee police chief assures residents that drugged-up gators warning was just a joke
   A deadpan joke turned rubes into gator bait. 
   A police posting warning residents about aggressive alligators blitzed on meth was too dry a gag for many. 
   The Loretto Police Department, located in southern Tennessee, was yukking it up after it posted information regarding the July 13 arrest of drug suspect Andy Perry, who was allegedly caught trying to flush liquid meth down the toilet before his bust. 
   After listing several crimes Perry had been charged with in a Facebook post, the department wrote, “On a more or less serious note: Folks . . . please don’t flush your drugs (OK)? . . . Ducks, geese and other fowl frequent our treatment ponds and we shudder to think what one all hyped up on meth would do. Furthermore, if it made it far enough we could create meth-gators in Shoal Creek and the Tennessee River down in North Alabama.” 
   But the joke backfired and the post went viral. Last week, media outlets picked up on the beastly tale, presuming that this police department was issuing a serious warning. 
   Fox News followed up the Perry arrest with a story about the police department warning residents about the potential of meth-gators. 
   Knoxville TV station WVLT went one step further and published a story about the possibility of meth-gators. It even interviewed a Georgia Department of Natural Resources worker about the science behind potential drugged-up reptiles. 
   On Friday, the Loretto PD issued another Facebook response, this time commenting on its initial post. 
   “We would like to start by saying we NEVER expected the response we have gotten for the ‘meth-gator’ post. Its reach has literally been worldwide with stories posted/printed all over the U.S., England, China, Australia, Russia and New Zealand. (The police chief) has had interviews with NBC, the BBC, Fox News, ‘Inside Edition’ and a host of local and regional television and radio stations.” 
   The post also noted that the department, with its newfound fame, would be seeking to generate revenue for the community with apparel featuring, among other things, a meth-gator. 
   But first, Loretto’s top cop, Billy Joe Killen, wanted to be crystal-clear about meth-gators. 
   “It was a joke used to bring it to people’s attention that they don’t need to be disposing of their prescription drugs or illegal drugs down the sewer system,” Killen told TV station WFMY.   
