   Instead of racking up Emmy awards, could Shailene Woodley be sitting on a Congressional committee soon? 
   The actress, 25, told the New York Times in a Q&A this week that she might consider running for public office. 
   "There was a point last year when I was working for Bernie Sanders where I thought, 'Huh, maybe I'll run for Congress in a couple years,'" the actress said. "And you know what? I'm not going to rule it out. Who knows? Life is big, and I'm young." 
   It's not too far-fetched, either. Woodley has long been an activist, with a focus on the climate. In 2010 she began a nonprofit organization aimed at educating young people about sustainability and improving themselves and the environment. 
   In 2016, she protested against the Dakota Access Pipeline and was arrested for trespassing in Saint Anthony, N.D. She pleaded guilty to the lesser charge of disorderly conduct and received one year of unsupervised probation. 
   The activism doesn't end there, either. Previously, she had repeated that she did not consider herself a feminist and that she'd been in pursuit of a respectable "sisterhood." 
   That tune has changed ever so slightly. 
   The actress is currently in Fiji, where she's filming the survival movie "Adrift." From there, she revised her previous position on feminism, telling The Times, "I would today consider myself a feminist. If females start working through the false narrative of jealousy and insecurity fed through a patriarchal society, then not only will we have more women feeling confident in themselves and supportive of one another, but we will start introducing a type of matriarchy, which is what this world needs. We need more softness and more silence and more pause through the chaos." 
   Sure sounds like the beginnings of a political platform. 
   The actress would have to wait five more years before she can run for the Senate (where the minimum age for the lawmakers is 30). She can, however, run for the House of Representatives. 
   If she has presidential aspirations, she'll have to wait a decade to reach the required minimum age of 35 to become president. 
   Woodley has already led an enduring film and TV career. She rose to fame in "The Secret Life of the American Teenager," starred in "The Fault in Our Stars" and "The Divergent Series," and has earned an Emmy nomination for Best Supporting Actress for the HBO mini-series "Big Little Lies."   
