Lawyer for Family of Sergei Magnitsky, Dead Russian Whistle-Blower, Is Seriously Injured
MOSCOW — A lawyer representing the family of Sergei L. Magnitsky, a Russian auditor and lawyer who died in prison in 2009 after uncovering a $230 million fraud targeting an American-born financier, suffered severe head injuries on Tuesday after plunging from his Moscow apartment building.
Russian news organizations said the lawyer, Nikolai Gorokhov, fell while helping movers carry a hot tub up to his fourth-floor apartment. They showed photographs of a shattered tub outside the building.
The financier, William F. Browder, said Mr. Gorokhov was to appear in a Moscow court on Wednesday to appeal on behalf of Mr. Magnitsky’s mother for an investigation into new evidence relating to the fraud scheme first exposed by Mr. Magnitsky.
“Basically, there is a trail of dead and seriously injured people leading from the Magnitsky case,” Mr. Browder said in a telephone interview early Wednesday. He said Russia’s post-Soviet version of the K.G.B., the Federal Security Service, or F.S.B., “is doing everything it can to shut down any serious investigation.”
Whether Mr. Gorokhov’s injuries were the result of an accident or foul play, the episode became the latest gruesome twist in a story that began when Mr. Magnitsky blew the whistle on what he believed was a tax rebate fraud involving official collusion and targeting Mr. Browder, who ran an investment company in Moscow, Hermitage Capital, from 1996 to 2005.
The Russian authorities have accused Mr. Browder, a British citizen who now lives in London, of orchestrating the fraud that he and Mr. Magnitsky attributed to criminals working in collusion with law enforcement authorities.
Mr. Gorokhov is a major witness in a case brought by American prosecutors against a Cypriot company accused of laundering some of the proceeds from the fraud.
Mr. Magnitsky, who was jailed in Moscow after speaking out about the fraud, died in 2009 after being denied essential medical care. His death earned the Kremlin widespread condemnation and led the United St
