Opposition Party in Poland Ends Monthlong Occupation of Parliament
ZAGAN, Poland — Poland’s largest opposition party ended a monthlong occupation of the country’s parliamentary chamber on Thursday, defusing — for now — the country’s biggest political crisis since a  right-wing government took power last year.
The crisis began on Dec. 16, when a lawmaker from Civic Platform, the main opposition party, stormed the parliamentary speaker’s rostrum to protest plans to curb the news media’s access to Parliament.
Unable to use the main parliamentary chamber, the ruling Law and Justice Party, which ousted Civic Platform in elections in 2015, moved to another room to vote on the country’s new budget. Some opposition members said they had not been allowed to enter that room, and they contended that the budget vote was unlawful.
Thousands of people poured into the streets of Warsaw in protest. The demonstrations lasted for weeks, though the number of protesters fell to a few dozen after the first two days.
Inside Parliament, tensions ran high. At one point, fisticuffs broke out, and lawmakers accused one another of assault, releasing contradictory videos accusing rivals of starting the fight. Meanwhile, supporters brought in food, including a small traditional Polish feast on Christmas Eve.
The opposition at times found it difficult to maintain a united front. On New Year’s Eve, Ryszard Petru, the leader of Modern, another opposition party involved in the sit-in, was photographed with a female lawmaker aboard a plane that was reportedly going to the Portuguese island of Madeira — after he had stated that opposition lawmakers should refrain from vacationing during the holidays. Amid the uproar, he apologized for what he acknowledged was an “indiscretion,” though he denied that he had been flying to Madeira. (He refused to say where he was headed.)
The standoff only underscored  concerns that European Union officials have raised about the state of democracy in Poland, where the government has moved to curb the independence of the judiciary and the news media.
On Thursday, Grzegorz Schetyna, the head of Civic Platform, said that after “succeeding at securing media’s access to the parliament building, as well as their unrestricted right to cover the parliamentary proceedings, we are suspending our protest.”
However, the issue of the budget — and whether it was lawfully passed — has not been resolved.
“We still consider the budget legislation to be illegal, and we appeal to President Andrzej Duda not to sign it,” Mr. Schetyna told reporters on Thursday.
It was not clear what Mr. Duda would do.
The occupation ended after a significant concession by the Law and Justice Party, which at the beginning of the week announced that it was scrapping plans to limit journalists’ access to Parliament — though the press center has been moved to another building.
On Wednesday, when Parliament was convened for the first time since the winter recess, the proceedings lasted only two minutes before being suspended. As dozens of lawmakers refused to leave the rostrum, Marek Kuchcinski, the speaker of Parliament, suspended the session until Thursday.
Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the head of the Law and Justice Party, who is seen as the real power behind both the president and the prime minister, Beata Szydlo, said that those who occupied the plenary hall should be severely punished.
“It’s good news that the occupation is over,” Mr. Kaczynski said. “But there are lessons to be learned from this. We need to rewrite the Parliament regulations to make such actions very, very hard to be repeated in future.”
Interior Minister Mariusz Blaszczak told a public radio station that the protesters could face up to 10 years in prison. “There is no doubt that preventing the speaker from fulfilling his duties is a crime,” he said.
Mr. Schetyna defended the opposition lawmakers’ protest.
“We didn’t leave because we’re afraid,” he said. “It’s ridiculous. If someone threatens you with prosecutors, it means they are weak. That’s how I see it.”
Jaroslaw Flis, a sociologist at Jagiellonian University in Krakow, described the crisis as a “perfect deadlock.”
“Both parties flexed their muscles and let us believe it was a life-or-death struggle,” he said. “To a huge disappointment of both sides, it wasn’t.”
Mr. Flis said there were no clear winners. “It was a kamikaze mission on both sides: I’ll either kill you or die myself,” he said. “They’ve all survived, but they are coming out of it very mauled.”
