Celebrity Healer in Brazil Is Accused of Sexually Abusing Followers
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — Thousands of Brazilians and foreigners have flocked to the small town of Abadiânia in central Brazil for years, lured by tales of a miraculous healer known as John of God who slices into patients without anesthesia and claims to channel spirits of the dead to cure conditions like cancer and chronic depression.
In recent days, dozens of women have come forward to accuse the famous medium, whose real name is João Teixeira de Faria, of being a serial sexual abuser who preyed on vulnerable patients during would-be healing sessions.
Their accounts have upended the image of Mr. Faria, whose global fame exploded after Oprah Winfrey broadcast a profile of him in 2010 and then interviewed him during a visit to his center in 2012.
As prosecutors sift through a mounting pile of victim statements, Mr. Faria appears likely to become the first major Brazilian casualty of the #MeToo movement, which so far has reverberated relatively little in Latin America’s largest nation.
The scandal began when several women provided similar accounts of unwanted sexual advances in interviews with a Brazilian television show that aired last weekend.
On Monday morning, dozens of other women came forward with more reports of uninvited sexual advances to news organizations and to the district attorney’s office in the state of Goiás, which set up a task force that includes five prosecutors and two psychologists.
In a day and a half, the task force received 78 complaints, said Patrícia Otoni, one of the prosecutors. “We have a serious challenge ahead,” she said. “We want to show the victims that they can trust us, that even someone who is famous and internationally admired can be investigated. But we also need to analyze each complaint before rushing to conclusions.”
Mr. Faria denies the accusations, according to a spokesman, Mario Rosa, who said the mounting accusations had taken on a “lynch mob” quality.
“It’s like this person is being turned into a villain for the world to see,” Mr. Rosa said.
Mr. Faria’s lawyer, Alberto Toron, expressed skepticism about the number of women making accusations.
“There were 10, now there are 20, and they’re talking about 200, which is strange,” he said in an interview with the newspaper Folha de São Paulo. “This is something we are investigating.”
Mr. Faria’s followers believe he is a medium who channels the spirits of dead doctors and other healers, who guide him to perform what he calls “spiritual surgeries” that cure ailments including sinus infections and paralysis.
The throngs of people who flock to his clinic, which opened in 1976, support a small tourism industry in the town, where Mr. Faria is the main draw. Patients have turned to him after watching graphic videos of his healing rituals, which include nasal probings, body incisions and eye scrapings.
In a 2010 profile, Oprah Winfrey said: “People around the world credit John of God and the spirits that work through him for many miraculous healings. He has also been misunderstood by some, persecuted by others and even accused of impropriety.”
Ms. Winfrey’s one-on-one interview in 2012, which aired the following year, turbocharged his fame. It is no longer available on her website.
“I went to Brazil in 2012 to tape an episode of ‘Oprah’s Next Chapter’ that explored the controversial healing methods of John of God,” Ms. Winfrey said in a statement. “The episode aired in 2013. I empathize with the women now coming forward and hope justice is served.”
Mr. Faria has, in years past, been accused of illegally practicing medicine, but has never been convicted. He faced sexual abuse charges in 2008, but was acquitted.
Ms. Otoni, the prosecutor, said there had been no pending complaints against Mr. Faria until the show “Conversa com Bial” on Saturday night included several interviews with women who said he had abused them.
Mr. Faria has not yet been called in for questioning because the investigation is in its early stages, Ms. Otoni said. Yet the accounts gathered so far point to a clear pattern, she said.
“The victims were people in a vulnerable situation who went to him with the hope that he could heal them,” she said. “The crimes they relate occur behind closed doors and show a similar modus operandi.”
The women interviewed on the program that aired over the weekend said they had been groped and forced to rub Mr. Faria’s penis after being summoned to his private room for individual “spiritual cleansing” sessions.
Mr. Faria was born in a village not far from where he eventually set up his clinic. The youngest of six children, he quit elementary school to help bring in money for his family and never learned to read or write, according to his official website. Before dedicating himself full-time to spiritual healing, he worked in mines and as a tailor.
Mr. Faria claims he had his first vision at age 9 and his first experience healing someone when he was 16. Since then, he has performed healing sessions that often include cutting into patients without using anesthesia, confounding doctors who have watched in awe. In video testimonials, followers have said they felt little or no pain during the procedures.
As his fame grew, Brazilians and desperate people from around the globe traveled to Abadiânia hoping for a miracle.
Zahira Lieneke Mous, the only woman who agreed to be identified on the television show, said in the interview that she had traveled to the clinic to heal the trauma from a previous incident of sexual abuse. A Dutch choreographer, she had heard about John of God from a friend and had seen Oprah Winfrey’s documentary.
She said she had been summoned for a private consultation with Mr. Faria. Once they were alone, she said, he placed her hands on his penis and instructed her to move them. After that encounter, she said, he invited her to choose a gemstone from his cabinet, and then during a second encounter he forced her to have anal sex.
After four years of silence, Ms. Mous went public with her account, posting a long message on Facebook and then appearing on the Brazilian talk show.
“I always thought I was the only person — I was in my own emotional prison,” she said in an interview. “When I realized I was not alone, I realized it was probably still going on and I had to go public.”
