Gunman Opens Fire in Brazilian Cathedral, Killing at Least 4
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — A man opened fire in a cathedral in southern Brazil at the end of Mass on Tuesday afternoon, killing four people and injuring four before he fatally shot himself, according to the authorities and witnesses.
The shooting took place at the Metropolitan Cathedral in Campinas, a Roman Catholic church in a wealthy agricultural city about 60 miles northwest of São Paulo. Footage from a security video shows the shooter, seated in a pew, suddenly stand up and take aim at parishioners right behind him. He then fires on people as they try to flee the church.
The authorities did not release the name of the shooter but said he was a man with no police record who worked as a computer technician, according to a spokesman for the Campinas Firefighters Department who asked not to be named. The assailant was armed with two handguns and his motive is not known, the spokesman said.
Brazil has one of the highest murder rates in the world, and gunfire is an almost daily occurrence in poor neighborhoods. Last year, there were about 175 homicides a day in Brazil, according to the Brazilian Forum on Public Safety.
But mass shootings are rare, and Tuesday’s attack left Brazilians shocked.
“The violence in our country has reached a critical level, but the huge mass of victims are young, black men from the suburbs and that has created a kind of normalization of violence,” said Felippe Angeli of the Sou da Paz Institute, which focuses on security issues. “But when the victims are from the middle class, the indignation grows.”
Jair Bolsonaro, a far-right former Army captain, was elected Brazil’s next president on the back of promises to combat political corruption and fight crime.
Often simulating gunfire with his hands during campaign rallies, Mr. Bolsonaro said he would combat the homicide epidemic by easing firearm laws and giving the police more freedom to shoot suspects. But critics argue more guns will simply generate more violence.
After Tuesday’s shooting, Father Amauri Thomazzi, the priest who had just said Mass, posted an emotional video on Facebook to say that he was safe.
“I only ask that you pray for the person,” he said of the shooter. “He killed himself after the situation. He shot people. There were more than 20 shots here inside.”
