North Korea Fires More Ballistic Missiles Ahead of U.S.-South Korea Military Drill
SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea on Tuesday launched two short-range ballistic missiles into the sea between the Korean Peninsula and Japan, days before the United States and South Korea were scheduled to begin a joint military exercise.
The launch marked the fourth test of projectiles in 13 days by North Korea.
The two missiles were fired from a province in the southwest of North Korea and flew 280 miles before splashing into waters off the North’s east coast, the South Korean military said in a statement.
The missiles looked like the short-range ballistic missiles that North Korea had fired on July 25, South Korean defense officials said, after analyzing their trajectory and other flight data.
In that test, North Korea launched two missiles that were similar to Russia’s Iskander short-range ballistic missile. North Korea said at the time that it had launched guided missiles that would be harder to intercept because they could be maneuvered during their flights.
Solid-fuel and road-mobile missiles like the Iskander would present a potent challenge to the missile defense system being built by the United States and South Korea. Such missiles are easier to transport and hide and take less time to prepare to launch.
South Korean officials have said that in all four of the tests that began on July 25, North Korea had launched short-range ballistic missiles. Under a series of United Nations resolutions, North Korea is banned from developing or testing ballistic missiles.
But North Korea has said its recent tests are of new types of tactical guided missiles and large-caliber multiple rocket launchers. North Korea has cited various reasons for its recent resumption of weapons tests, including the modernization of its military.
With the tests, North Korea could also be signaling its opposition to the joint military drill scheduled to begin this week. Last month, it warned that if the United States and South Korea did not cancel the drill, it might scuttle efforts to resume dialogue with Washington and even resume nuclear and long-range missile tests.
North Korea routinely condemns joint military drills by the South and the United States, calling them rehearsals for invasion, and has often countered them with its own missile and other weapons tests.
“The U.S. and South Korean authorities know too well that the joint military exercise will cause a backlash from us,” a spokesman for the North Korean Foreign Ministry said in a statement on Tuesday. “We are compelled to develop, test and deploy the powerful physical means essential for national defense.”
The spokesman added that North Korea remained “unchanged in our stand to resolve the issues through dialogue” but that the impending joint military exercise was a hindrance to further talks.
“The prevailing situation is dramatically dampening down our desire for implementing the D.P.R.K.-U.S. agreements and the inter-Korean agreements, which also affects the prospect of future dialogue,” the spokesman said. “There is no need to have a fruitless and exhausting dialogue with those who do not have a sense of communication.”
The D.P.R.K. stands for the North’s official name, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The American secretary of defense, Mark T. Esper, said on Tuesday that the Pentagon was not going to “overreact” to the latest North Korean test.
“The key is to keep the door open for diplomacy,” Mr. Esper told reporters during a flight to Tokyo. He pointed to President Trump’s meeting in June with Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, as a positive development.
Mr. Esper added that the United States had no plans to scale back future military exercises with South Korea in response to the North Korean tests.
Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim held their first summit meeting in Singapore in June last year, producing a vaguely worded agreement in which North Korea committed to “work toward complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula” in return for “new” relations with Washington. Separately, Mr. Kim met with President Moon Jae-in of South Korea three times last year, producing agreements to reduce military tensions between the two Koreas.
After the Singapore meeting, Mr. Trump vowed to halt major joint military drills with South Korea. But the South Korean and American militaries have continued to hold smaller and reconfigured joint drills that they say are necessary to maintain their defensive postures.
When Mr. Kim and Mr. Trump met for a second time in Hanoi, Vietnam, in February, they failed to agree on how to start dismantling the North’s nuclear program.
The two leaders met again, briefly, on the border between the two Koreas on June 30 and agreed to resume staff-level talks to narrow their differences. But such talks have yet to begin.
Mr. Trump has played down the significance of the North’s recent tests, calling them “smaller ones” that did not involve a nuclear weapon or intercontinental ballistic missile. He said he was still getting along “very well” with Mr. Kim.
