   The envelope, please — and fill it with cash. 
   It’s literally anyone’s guess which film will win the Oscar for best picture. Same goes for best actor, best actress, etc. That’s why oddsmakers are also taking bets on the little things that make Hollywood’s annual, self-congratulatory, televised celebration watchable in between major category announcements. 
   The Daily News asked the Antigua-based online gambling site MyBookie.com to create a betting line exclusively for our readers. Everyone is invited to log on and place their bets on the categories My Bookie oddsmaker David Strauss set for the Feb. 24 broadcast. 
   Not even the TV networks have any idea how long the Academy Awards will run, but Strauss says the show will last three hours and 50 minutes and invites bettors to wager on whether the broadcast will be longer or shorter. Or — as gamblers say — three hours and 50 minutes is “the over/under.” 
   It’s an interesting proposition, considering last year’s show lasted three hours and 53 minutes. This year, the program won’t have a host making small talk. Strauss does not think that will be a factor. 
   “Even without the host there’s going to be a lot of people talking,” he said. “Hollywood types love to talk about themselves.” 
   The 91st Academy Awards are going host-less because comedian Kevin Hart withdrew from the gig following the revelation he’d made homophobic remarks early in his career, for which he has apologized. My Bookie says there’s a 42% chance that either a presenter or award recipient will mention Hart’s debacle on stage Sunday. 
   One thing that occasionally lengthens awards shows are political speeches from behind the podium. Last year, host Jimmy Kimmel and performer Common stood on stage and took shots at Vice President Pence and the NRA respectively. This year, My Bookie says there’s an 86% chance an award winner or presenter will say the Trump family name and invites gamblers who disagree to place their bets. 
   The online gambling house also bets 3-to-1 the ceremony will not be interrupted by political protesters in the crowd. That means anyone who gambles that an uninvited political outburst will disrupt the show will win $3 for every $1 they bet. Odds are also around 3-to-1 that a swear word will slip by ABC’s censors. 
   In 2013 actress Jennifer Lawrence famously fell down en route to collecting her Oscar — a feat she repeated on the red carpet in 2014. With the two-time Academy Award winner not being nominated for anything in 2019, odds are even that someone will take a tumble. In other words, bet a dollar, win a dollar. 
   “That one is a crap shoot,” Strauss admitted. He also said Lawrence would not have changed the odds. 
   “You have to think after falling twice she’d be careful about the third time she walks up there,” he said. 
   In 2017, presenters Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty incorrectly announced “La La Land” won best picture. It turned out “Moonlight” was the winner and there’d been a mix up with the envelope bearing the information. It’s a longshot that anything like that will happen this year, though My Bookie will pay 4-to-1 to anyone who correctly bets on history to repeat. 
   Oddsmakers don’t think viewers will see another Fiji Water gimmick like the promotional stunt that became the talk of the Golden Globes red carpet in January. The experts say there’s a 33% chance the water company will manage to photobomb celebs with carefully-placed models on the red carpet Sunday. 
   There’s no doubt a lot of people will watch the Oscars, though viewership hit a record low in 2018 when only 26.5 million film fans tuned in. According to My Bookie, the fans the show lost are not coming back. They say there's only a 33% chance more viewers tune in this year than last year. 
   Strauss said most gamblers will bank on “Roma” winning best picture, which means payout for his company will be minimal if it claims the Oscar. He personally will not be pulling for the underdog. 
   “’A Star is Born’ or ‘Black Panther’ would be terrible for us,” he said.   
