SYDNEY, Australia — The multimillion-dollar annual compensation package paid to the head of Australia’s postal agency has suddenly cast a spotlight on executive salaries and growing levels of inequality in the country.
Public outrage over the 5.6 million Australian dollars, or $4.3 million, that was paid to Ahmed Fahour of Australia Post has prompted Senate hearings, and the chairman of the agency defended Mr. Fahour’s compensation at one such hearing on Tuesday.
John Stanhope, the chairman of Australia Post, said that as managing director and group chief executive, Mr. Fahour did not just run a postal service operation but rather an e-commerce company. He argued that taxpayers had received a good return on their investment.
Mr. Fahour announced last week that he would resign from the government-owned business in July after seven years on the job. The move followed a torrent of criticism after his pay was recently revealed publicly.
Though Mr. Fahour worked for a government-owned corporation, he was being paid at the level of a top-ranking executive at a publicly listed private company instead, experts said.
Australia Post was asked to provide details about its executives’ salaries during a Senate hearing late last year. The company said it would provide the information but requested that it be kept secret, arguing that it could damage its brand. A Senate committee rejected that request after concluding that the information was in the public interest.
Mr. Stanhope acknowledged in the hearing on Tuesday that the company should not have tried to conceal Mr. Fahour’s salary to avoid scrutiny and damage to the organization’s reputation.
“The mistake was that even though we didn’t have to disclose, it was probably a good thing to disclose,” Mr. Stanhope said. “We need our salary packages to be commercially competitive to attract and retain talented people in a competitive, executive talent market.”
Carl Rhodes, a professor of management at the University of Technology Sydney who researches business ethics, said Mr. Fahour earned about 10 times what the prime minister of Australia makes, up to 119 times what a postal worker makes and more than 73 times what workers in the transportation, postal and warehousing industries make.
“His salary compared to his equivalent, for example, in the United States and Canada is extremely high,” Professor Rhodes said.
Mr. Fahour’s counterpart in the United States Postal Service earns about $416,000 annually, and in Canada, the compensation is less than that, Professor Rhodes said.
Mitchell Fifield, Australia’s minister for communication and the arts, said that Australia Post had experienced strong growth under Mr. Fahour and that he played an integral role in overhauling the organization in 2015. That allowed the company to return to profitability in the 2016 financial year.
