MEXICO CITY — Protests snaking through city streets, nighttime curfews, a raucous political battle over a president’s re-election: Honduras has been seized by a crisis since a disputed vote last month.
The country has lived through a version of this turmoil before. Eight years ago, a leftist president was ousted by a coup in a fight over what his opponents said was a plan to overturn the constitutional ban on a second presidential term. The resistance movement that sprang up to support him has endured, and the discord that split Honduran society then still defines today’s divisions.
Both in 2009 and now, the return of stability in Honduras is important to the United States, which seeks a president there who can be counted on to support American policies to stem the flow of drugs and migrants from reaching the Texas border.
The question is whether the United States is willing to overlook a possibly fraudulent election to ensure that outcome.
President Juan Orlando Hernández, a conservative hoping to win a second term, has been a willing partner on the concerns that matter most to the United States. And as he increased control over every branch of the government since his election in 2013, no objections were raised from the Obama or Trump administrations — not even when his handpicked Supreme Court justices found a circuitous way to lift the prohibition on running for re-election.
How well the White House navigates a resolution of the contested election may not only affect Honduran democracy but also could resound across the region, where elections are scheduled over the next year in seven countries, including Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela and Colombia.
“Will the United States remain consistent in defending the electoral process, regardless of whether the country in question is friend or foe,” wrote Juan Gonzalez, an adviser to former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. on Central America, in an email, “or equivocate when the process breaks down in a country that cooperates with the United States?”
More than two weeks after Hondurans voted, the election outcome is still in doubt. According to the count by the electoral commission, which is controlled by Mr. Hernández’s allies, the president won nearly 52,500 more votes than his main opponent, Salvador Nasralla, who leads a leftist coalition.
But the vote was deeply flawed, according to election monitors from the Organization of American States. The organization outlined steps toward reviewing the vote count and warned that if the irregularities were too widespread it could recommend a new election.
The Trump administration has endorsed the O.A.S. measures as a way to “reach a credible conclusion,” the United States chargé d’affaires, Heide B. Fulton, told local reporters last week. She delivered the message standing beside the embattled president of the electoral commission, which many Honduran critics viewed as a gesture of support for the agency.
In what critics called another diplomatic blunder, the State Department gave Mr. Hernández a public lift just as the election conflict escalated. Two days after the vote, it certified that Honduras was meeting human rights conditions, strengthening transparency and cracking down on corruption. That approval was required to release 50 percent of the American aid earmarked for the Honduran central government.
Mr. Hernández’s National Party jumped on the certification as a vote of confidence in the president from the United States, proof that outside countries had recognized his “arduous fight against corruption and criminality.”
The aid, about $17 million, goes to Honduran security forces, for counternarcotics and anti-gang programs and to fund an effort to purge the police of corrupt officers and train recruits.
But Senator Patrick J. Leahy, who wrote the law requiring approval and is empowered to release the aid, is likely to withhold it for now, his office said. He has yet to release an amount allocated last year.
“In the past, U.S. administrations — Republican and Democratic — have always had an overriding foreign policy goal: fighting communism, terrorism or drugs, or stopping migrants,” Mr. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, said in an email.
“These considerations have taken precedence over human rights,” Mr. Leahy said. “That has been the pattern, and the money has kept flowing. It hasn’t produced the results that Honduras needs and that we all want. That needs to change.”
The dispute over the election result can be traced to the erratic behavior of the electoral commission, which first declared that Mr. Nasralla was leading before suspending the count for a day and a half. When it resumed, the trend reversed, giving Mr. Hernández his small margin.
Largely peaceful protests filled the streets in support of Mr. Nasralla. But in some places, security forces shot at protesters, while looting and violence prompted the government to declare a nighttime curfew. Fourteen people, including two police officers, were killed, according to an advocacy group, the Committee of Relatives of the Disappeared in Honduras.
The peaceful demonstrations have continued, although a few clashes between the police and protesters have erupted at roadblocks. Radio Progreso, an opposition broadcaster, said its antenna in Tegucigalpa, the capital, was sabotaged this past weekend.
The protests echo the weeks after the 2009 coup when the political and business elite allied with the military to remove Manuel Zelaya from the presidency.
The Obama administration sought a quick solution after the coup, pressing Honduras to move ahead with elections already scheduled for a few months later.
What followed was an eruption of violence under a presidency that appeared unwilling or unable to control gangs and drug traffickers. The murder rate rose to one of the highest in the world.
“After the coup, you still had a very polarized society,” said Adriana Beltrán, a Central America expert at the Washington Office on Latin America, a research and advocacy group. “The consequences have not been dealt with.”
In the years immediately after the coup, the Obama administration focused largely on the drug war, working alongside Honduran forces. The collaboration led to failures like the death of four Honduran civilians in a mission overseen by agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration in 2012.
At the same time, drug gangs corrupted high-ranking police officers and politicians. The son of Porfirio Lobo, a former president, is serving a 24-year sentence in the United States for conspiring to import cocaine.
When Mr. Hernández took office, Washington appeared willing to overlook his more autocratic actions in the hope that he would restore stability. He worked closely with John F. Kelly, then the commander of United States Southern Command and now President Trump’s chief of staff.
Only after Honduran children and families began appearing at the Texas border seeking asylum did the Obama administration begin to acknowledge that corruption and the failure of the rule of law were partly responsible for that problem, Ms. Beltrán said.
The Trump administration has proposed cutting aid to Central America and pushed to end a special immigration status for some long-term migrants in the United States. Sending them home would strain the Honduran economy, which relies on remittances from abroad and could not integrate tens of thousands of deportees.
With the White House pushing law and order policies, many worry that the deeper problems facing Honduras will be overlooked.
“I worry about us losing our focus and not staying the course in ensuring that Honduras rids itself of corruption and builds the institutions that everybody needs,” said Eric L. Olson, an expert on Central America at the Wilson Center, a Washington research group.
