Living in Fear, Duterte’s Chief Critic Speaks Out From Philippine Jail
MANILA — In a prison surrounded by tall walls topped with razor wire, past three security checkpoints, inside a tiny, sweltering cell with bare walls and bars on the high windows, the Philippines’ most famous prisoner sits at a small desk furiously writing a letter.
Senator Leila de Lima, 57, one of President Rodrigo Duterte’s most prominent critics, was sent here last month on charges of taking payoffs from drug traffickers, charges she says are false and part of an effort to keep her quiet.
Ms. de Lima, a lawyer and a grandmother, may be a prisoner at Camp Crame, inside the National Police Headquarters in Quezon City, north of Manila, but silent is one thing she won’t be.
“When I get to see something in the papers that I feel like reacting to, I take it down and write,” she said. “My annotated handwritten dispatches from Crame,” she jokingly called her letters.
They are handwritten because she is allowed neither laptop, nor phone. She has had weekly visits with her staff and has tried to carry on her Senate business, but she cannot vote on bills because she cannot be present on the Senate floor.
She passes the time by reading. Her desk is stacked with paperback novels and books on politics. She takes walks in the courtyard, where there is a broken basketball hoop.
And she cries.
“When I am about to sleep, that’s the worst time for me,” she said in an interview in her cell this week. “That’s when emotions creep in. I think about my family. I think about my home. I think about my own bed in my comfortable room.”
At dusk, after the visitors are shooed out, the staff is gone for the night and she is locked in her cell, her only company is a stray cat that wanders the compound.
Still, she has no regrets, she says, “because I have done nothing wrong.”
She added, “I am innocent, and this is political persecution, plain and simple.”
Ms. de Lima has a long history with Mr. Duterte. As chairwoman of the Philippine Commission on Human Rights in 2008, she led an investigation into extrajudicial killings in Davao City, where Mr. Duterte was mayor. She later became secretary of justice, and last May, she was elected to the Senate the same day Mr. Duterte was elected president.
Since then, as chairwoman of the Senate Justice Committee, she has investigated Mr. Duterte’s antidrug campaign, in which thousands of suspects have been killed by the police and vigilantes.
She traces her jailing to the day last September when her committee heard testimony from Edgar Matobato, a professed hit man who said he worked for the Davao Death Squad, which he said Mr. Duterte created and commanded.
Mr. Duterte did not respond to the accusations but immediately assailed Ms. de Lima, accusing her of having an affair with her driver, of making a sex tape that he claimed to have watched, and of taking millions of dollars in cash from convicted drug traffickers to finance her senatorial campaign.
The last charge became the basis of a criminal case, and she was arrested in February.
Since then, another death squad member, Arthur Lascañas, has come forward and corroborated Mr. Matobato’s testimony.
The senator says her lawyers are arguing an appeal before the Supreme Court, and she hopes to be freed by April, in time to celebrate Easter with her family.
Until then, this steaming cell is her home office.
During the visit on Thursday, the senator, known for her sartorial taste and collection of colorful scarves, was trying to keep cool in a short-sleeved print blouse and black shorts.
She was in a combative mood. The day before, on a trip to Thailand, Mr. Duterte had publicly insulted her, saying she had a “thick face” and that she was the “queen Satan is waiting for in hell.”
As she sat at her desk, a small fan whirring in the background, sweat formed on her brow.
“Unsatisfied with the fact that he was already able to imprison me,” she wrote with a blue felt-tip across her Senate stationery, “he continues to destroy me before various audiences like a market fishwife and leaves no dignity whatsoever to the office he holds. I pity the president for believing in his own lies.”
It was a brief moment of righteous indignation punctuating a long, mostly solitary day.
“My life has become routine,” she said. “I have breakfast, then I read the papers, take a bath and then go to work on documents delivered by my staff here.”
She has her own toilet and running water. On a small table are wilting roses and other flowers. Recent visitors brought rare orchids in an attempt to liven the place up.
The prison has closed-circuit cameras in every corner except in her cell. The guards, she said, have been strict but “very professional and courteous.”
Her two adult sons, Vincent and Israel — who has autism — and two grandchildren try to visit her every week. But it has been hard, especially for Vincent, who is a law student, she said without elaborating.
Every week, her favorite among her 13 pet dogs is also brought in for a visit, a concession granted by her jailers.
“These visits lift my spirits, because as you can see, I am isolated,” she said.
She is also afraid.
She noted that a mayor whom Mr. Duterte had publicly accused of drug trafficking later died in jail, gunned down by police officers who raided his cell and claimed he had put up a violent fight.
“That can happen to me as well,” she said. “In the realm of possibilities, that can happen.”
She denounced as “fake news” reports that she tried to commit suicide after she was arrested, saying those reports were fabricated to lay the groundwork for a cover-up should she be killed in prison. She was not sick or depressed, she said.
“If I die inside Duterte’s prisons, it is not because I committed suicide,” she said then, “but it is because the president has finally ordered me killed. In the unfortunate event that I die in prison, you all know who my murderer is.”
To be safe in prison, she has food brought in by her staff from the outside.
“I cannot show myself to be afraid,” she said. “I don’t want to give them the satisfaction of seeing me defeated. But if you ask me if I feel safe, I can never feel safe.”
What is keeping her alive, she says, may be her stature and the international attention her case has drawn. The European Union and Human Rights Watch have both called for her release.
“But if the world is no longer watching, I believe the worst thing can happen to me,” she said. “I’ll be dead. I can never feel safe with a president like that.”
