Abu Sayyaf Militants Are Killed in Gunfight With Police
MANILA — Four Abu Sayyaf militants were killed on Saturday in a gunfight with the police and troops in the central Philippines, more than a week after the group surprised the authorities by venturing north of its traditional stronghold and engaging in deadly clashes, the military said Sunday.
A spokesman for the military said security forces were hunting several other members of the terrorist group on the tourist island of Bohol, in the central Visayas region. They recovered at least three high-powered firearms from the group.
The violent confrontation occurred after an Abu Sayyaf member gave away the group’s location when he went to town to buy bread, the authorities said.
“The hunt continues for the remaining two or three terrorists who were part of the band that attempted to establish a foothold in Bohol but failed,” said Col. Edgard Arevalo, the military spokesman. “We have reports indicating that they were also wounded and running out of supplies.”
Abu Sayyaf, or Bearers of the Sword, was once affiliated with Al Qaeda but has declared allegiance to the Islamic State, the authorities have said. It has been considered one of Southeast Asia’s most brutal militant groups for several decades, bursting onto the international scene by abducting foreigners and beheading some who did not pay ransom.
One leader of the group, Abu Rami, and four of his colleagues were killed on April 11. Mr. Rami had acted as Abu Sayyaf’s spokesman, and had brazenly shown his face in videos when the group had beheaded hostages. Mr. Rami’s unit of Abu Sayyaf is believed to have played a direct role in the abductions and killings of foreigners, the military said.
In February, the militants beheaded Jürgen Kantner, 70, a yachtsman from Germany, after his government did not pay a $600,000 ransom. He was snatched in November as he sailed in the southern Philippines with his partner, a woman who was believed to have been fatally shot during the kidnapping.
Last year, Abu Sayyaf beheaded two Canadian hostages who had been seized from a beach resort on Samal Island, also in the south.
Last week, Abu Sayyaf militants beheaded a Filipino fisherman, whom they seized in December, because his relatives did not pay a ransom.
Among the four militants killed on Saturday was a man identified as Joselito Milloria, a Bohol native, who had converted to Islam and joined Abu Sayyaf after marrying a Muslim woman.
The four were killed one after the other, with Mr. Milloria the first to fall, the military said. A rifle and a grenade launcher were recovered from him. The three others were shot in a series of firefights on Saturday.
Gen. Eduardo Año of the armed forces said the military would not stop until all the Abu Sayyaf militants were found or killed.
They will “suffer the same fatal consequences as these terrorists for attempting to bring in terror and havoc to this tranquil province of Bohol — or in other places in the country, for that matter,” he said.
Numbering in the hundreds and traditionally based in the southern islands of Basilan and Jolo, the group is believed to operate primarily as a profit-driven criminal enterprise.
Abu Sayyaf is responsible for the deadliest terrorist attack in the country’s history. In 2004, the group bombed a passenger ferry on Manila Bay, killing more than 100 people.
