China, Sending a Signal, Launches a Home-Built Aircraft Carrier
BEIJING — China’s first domestically built aircraft carrier slipped into the sea for the first time on Wednesday, after days of publicity celebrating the impending launch as a milestone in President Xi Jinping’s drive to extend China’s military reach far beyond its shores.
Senior military and government officials watched as a champagne bottle was smashed on the bow and as the 1,033-foot gray hull of the carrier eased into the water at Dalian, a northeastern port, the Chinese military  news media reported. The ship, festooned with red national flags and banners, then stopped next to the dock.
The launch “signified a major stage of progress of our country’s indigenous design and construction of aircraft carriers,” a news bulletin from the People’s Liberation Army said. It said the carrier would undergo more testing and fitting of equipment before trials in the water.
The carrier launch comes as tensions rise over China’s activities in the South China Sea and North Korean’s nuclear ambitions. China is entangled in maritime disputes with several Asian countries, including Japan, the Philippines and Vietnam. India is also wary of China’s growing presence in the Indian Ocean, and Australia is responding to China’s naval buildup with its own.
China’s two aircraft carriers are no match in size, power and endurance for those of the United States Navy, which keeps 10 carriers and has two under construction. President Trump said last month that he would strengthen the Navy.
Yet the launch conveyed that China intended to build a navy that could not be beaten by other Asian countries, said Patrick M. Cronin, the senior director of the Asia-Pacific Security Program at the Center for a New American Security in Washington.
“With each new aircraft carrier, China is sending a signal that it has no peer among its neighbors,” he said.
China launched its first aircraft carrier, the Liaoning, in 2011, after buying and equipping its rusting Soviet-era hull from Ukraine in 1998. The new carrier is built along similar lines, although it appears slightly larger and more advanced, analysts said. The vessel may need three or so years before it is fully equipped, tested and commissioned for missions.
China is pursuing a long-term strategy of integrating these “floating sovereign airfields” into military operations, Mr. Cronin said. “But the political and psychological benefits keep accruing, and the impact in China’s near seas is being felt today.”
Mr. Xi has also made modernizing and overhauling the People’s Liberation Army a pillar of his policies; in particular, he has overhauled command to shift more resources from traditional land forces to naval and air forces. Those complicated and probably contentious changes are underway, and last week, Mr. Xi told military commanders to embrace change.
“Adjust to the demands of integrated joint operations and to the new system and organization,” Mr. Xi said last Tuesday while meeting commanders of 84 corps-level units created as foundations of the reshuffle. “Develop into a crack operational force.”
The Chinese Navy is at the heart of Mr. Xi’s military plans. In addition to aircraft carriers, China has been building other vessels that could support and shield them on missions, said Andrew S. Erickson, a professor at the United States Naval War College and editor of a new book on Chinese naval shipbuilding.
“China is building a blue-water navy for the long term: not just the carriers themselves but the auxiliary ships to supply them and the warships to protect them,” he said in an email. Other ships built or under construction include a new type of supply vessel, as well as four cruisers suited for escorting a carrier, Mr. Erickson said.
Even so, the relatively modest size and capabilities of the new carrier suggest that China is modernizing and expanding its naval forces in a step-by-step way, avoiding risky technological leaps, experts said.
The first news reports did not give the ship’s name, though previous reports have said it would probably be called the Shandong, after the eastern Chinese coastal province.
When fully equipped, the carrier will weigh around 70,000 metric tons, experts have estimated. The United States Navy’s current Nimitz-class aircraft carriers weigh 100,000 tons and use nuclear power, which allows them to stay at sea longer without maintenance.
It will probably be two or three years before China’s newest carrier is commissioned, bringing it into operation. Building more advanced carriers capable of long-term missions far from China’s shores will take many years beyond that.
The launch of the carrier signals “the rise and growth of overall national power,” Li Jie, a Chinese naval expert, told China’s Science and Technology Daily this month. But Mr. Li tried to douse any sense of triumphalism.
“Although we’ve made big strides, it can’t be said that we have the technology to surpass British and French aircraft carriers,” Mr. Li said. Mastering carriers, he added, “was not as easy as we imagined.”
China’s launch came soon after a United States aircraft carrier, the Carl Vinson, provided lessons in the power and difficulties of operating these floating airfields.
Mr. Trump had said the Carl Vinson was part of an “armada” sent to deter North Korea from provocative actions, including a nuclear test. But it turned out that the carrier was thousands of miles south of the Korean Peninsula. It has since moved north, and on Wednesday, it was conducting exercises with Japanese forces in the Philippine Sea.
Even bigger, advanced carriers like the Carl Vinson are dangerous places, especially for the pilots. A pilot on a training run from the Carl Vinson ejected safely into the Celebes Sea, which borders Indonesia and the Philippines, while on a final, failed approach to land on the carrier, the navy said on Friday.
China is still building up its expertise in running carriers and integrating them with other naval vessels. Both its carriers use decks with “ski jump”-shaped launch platforms to boost planes into the air, a technique that is simpler, though less powerful, than the catapult method used by American carriers.
These and other technical limits mean that China’s two aircraft carriers will not be able to range out to sea for as long as American carriers, nor will the jets that fly from them be able to carry as much munitions and fuel as American carrier fighters. They will be better suited to displays of power within the region, especially the disputed South China Sea, rather than long-term missions far from their base.
These carriers are also vulnerable to attack from missiles and torpedoes — one reason that other countries may not go to the expense of building them. But Chinese military thinkers argue that carriers remain an essential part of projecting power.
“Aircraft carriers are still the most operationally powerful and worthwhile platforms at sea,” the official news website for the People’s Liberation Army said last month. “They’re irreplaceable and are even more difficult to surpass.”
