Salvini’s Standoff at Sea Highlights Italy’s War on Rescue Ships
ROME — It has become a ritual under Italy’s anti-migrant government. A rescue ship packed with African migrants is marooned for weeks in the Mediterranean while Matteo Salvini, Italy’s hard-line interior minister, wins political points by refusing to let it dock.
But the latest standoff, between the Spanish aid ship Open Arms, carrying about 150 migrants, and Mr. Salvini shows the culmination of Italy’s evolution from a country that anguished over the loss of migrant lives to one that has essentially declared war on the ships that rescue them.
The opening salvos by previous, and left-leaning, Italian governments against those ships ultimately led Italian Parliament this month to pass a new security law pushed by Mr. Salvini, codifying his view of rescue ships as accomplices of human traffickers.
The law empowers Mr. Salvini to deny aid ships entry into Italian waters, confiscate boats and impose a million euro fine on ship captains who disobeyed him.
Making matters worse for Open Arms, the ship has sailed straight into a political hurricane. Days ago, Mr. Salvini pulled the plug on a government he helps lead in an effort to force new elections. If those elections are held, he is likely to win, putting him firmly in charge of a new government.
To rally support, he has dipped back into the anti-migrant well. Open Arms, and another ship called the Ocean Viking — carrying 350 asylum seekers, including apparently 103 minors — are floating campaign ads for his hard-line approach.
“Timidity? Appeals for a false conception of ‘humanity?’ Open ports? Landings by the thousands? Not in my name!” Mr. Salvini, who has spent much of the last month campaigning on Italy’s beaches, wrote on Twitter on Friday. “Italy, raises its head again!”
That afternoon, the operators of Open Arms invited doctors aboard, they said, to visit with the ship’s 28 unaccompanied minors, and appealed for an emergency evacuation of everyone on board, saying that the physical and psychological health of the passengers had deteriorated to a critical level.
“Their security is at risk,” the organization wrote on Twitter.
Mr. Salvini argues that his hard-line policies have deterred migrants, and smugglers, from making the deadly crossing. He points to his ministry’s statistics showing an 80 percent decline in migrant arrivals, and a significant drop in the number of deaths at sea.
Critics say that the statistics show that the likelihood of death for those migrants who do risk the crossing is now much higher than before.
His soon-to-be-former coalition partners, the Five Star Movement, who have supported his anti-migrant measures, are suddenly voicing displeasure, saying he has gone too far. Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte, technically neutral but clearly close to Five Star, is expected to face a confidence vote, called by Mr. Salvini, on Tuesday.
Mr. Salvini told reporters that Mr. Conte had asked him to let all the ship’s passengers into Italy. Mr. Conte said he had asked for only the children to be let off; he then called Mr. Salvini “treacherous” and seized by an “obsession” with migrants.
That’s just what Mr. Salvini was waiting for.
“With me the ports are and will remained CLOSED to the traffickers and their foreign collaborators,” Mr. Salvini responded in a Facebook post, later adding that he was running against “those who work to reopen the faucet on illegal immigration.”
Liberals argue that Mr. Salvini, who is responsible for enforcing Italy’s law, has placed himself above it by rejecting court orders to accept the migrants.
On Aug. 13, Open Arms filed a complaint with an Italian administrative court, arguing that the denial of permission to enter Italian waters violated international law and the human rights of the migrants on board.
The ship’s operators said they had picked up migrants in international waters and on Aug. 1 immediately contacted the closest safe countries, Italy and Malta, requesting a port. The Maltese refused. The Italians replied with a blank email containing an attachment of Mr. Salvini’s new security law, Veronica Alfonsi, a spokeswoman for Open Arms, said.
They turned to an Italian court for help.
The court sided with the rescue ship, and it entered Italian waters. But Mr. Salvini simply issued a new order denying the ship entry.
In June, another aid ship, the Sea Watch, had docked without permission in Lampedusa, drawing condemnation from Mr. Salvini and further polarizing Italy between those who took the side of the migrants and those who wanted to seal off the country’s borders. Mr. Salvini clearly felt that most Italians agreed with him.
Ms. Alfonsi said that the Open Arms ship, mindful of the stiff penalties of the new law, would not try to dock without permission.
The plight of the migrants on board the ship highlights how humanitarian aid work, once largely viewed as heroic, has steadily been rejected, and even criminalized, by Italian leaders.
In 2013, a shipwreck off Lampedusa killed hundreds of asylum seekers and prompted soul searching over how Italy should respond to the humanitarian crisis at its shore. Pope Francis highlighted the issue by making his first trip out of Rome to a migrant camp in Lampedusa.
The Italian government, under the center-left Democratic Party, responded with an expensive search-and-rescue program called Mare Nostrum, credited with saving more than 150,000 lives during its brief duration.
The high cost of the program attracted criticism, however, and it was eventually replaced in 2014 by Triton, a mission run by Frontex, the border control agency of the European Union.
But Triton proved less effective, and that year the Migrants Offshore Aid Station, inspired by the deaths in Lampedusa, became the first nongovernmental organization to operate a rescue ship in the central Mediterranean.
Over the next years, as Italy’s European Union neighbors failed to help Italy deal with the enormous numbers of arrivals, a proliferation of rescue ships, operated by Doctors Without Borders and other reputable nongovernmental organizations, sought to fill the gaps.
At the same time, public opinion, guided by Mr. Salvini and other anti-immigrant voices on the right, began to turn against the migrants.
Amid that change in the political climate, the Financial Times published a confidential report in November 2016 by Frontex, the European Union border agency, raising concern “that criminal networks were smuggling migrants directly on an NGO vessel” and blaming rescue ships for using their lights “as a beam for the migrants” in Libyan waters.
Right-wing media seized on the report, as did Italy’s ascendant politicians. Luigi Di Maio, the leader of the Five Star Movement, called for “an immediate stop to the sea-taxi service.”
Italy’s center-left government toughened its approach to rescue ships, and began drastically bringing down the number of new arrivals.
In an interview, Marco Minniti, the interior minister at the time, who was seeking deals with Libyan tribal leaders to stem the departures, called for a code of conduct that would prevent rescue ships from entering Libyan waters.
Given that more than 40 percent of migrants arrived on rescue ships, he demanded that the ships grant full access to Italian law enforcement at sea, calling it his “duty” to make sure that there was a “a minimum of security.”
Under Mr. Salvini, that line has evolved into a vow to close Italy’s ports to rescue ships completely.
