A Watchdog Found Trudeau Broke the Law, but Not Everyone Agrees
At the start of this week, it appeared the usual midsummer news drought would allow me to indulge in writing about my cycling obsession and a 400 kilometer trip I’d made from our cottage back to Ottawa last weekend. Mario Dion, however, changed all that.
Unless you’ve been vacationing off the grid, you’re likely to know that Mr. Dion, Canada’s ethics commissioner, released a report finding that Prime Minister Justin Trudeau broke the law when he and his staff pressured Jody Wilson-Raybould to cut a deal with SNC-Lavalin that would have replaced a criminal conviction for corruption and bribery charges with a hefty fine.
[Read: Canada’s ethics commissioner found Justin Trudeau violated ethics law in his efforts to influence the SNC-Lavalin case.]
Mr. Dion, a lawyer who worked as a public servant and who was previously the chairman of the Immigration and Refugee Board, did not hold back in his report, writing at one point that Mr. Trudeau used his office “to circumvent, undermine and ultimately attempt to discredit” Ms. Wilson-Raybould.
The report is a legal document and far from a light read. Mr. Trudeau’s position on its findings has been, to some extent, one in which he tries to have it both ways. While in Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, for some pre-election campaigning, he said he took responsibility for the mistakes he had made. But he also made it clear that he did not think that pushing for an SNC-Lavalin settlement was among those mistakes. A criminal conviction would bar the engineering and construction company, which is already performing poorly, from doing government work. That, Mr. Trudeau continues to contend, would cost jobs.
As has been the case since February, the opposition isn’t buying that idea.
On Friday, I spoke with Errol Mendes, a professor of law at the University of Ottawa, whose areas of study include constitutional law and public sector governance. He told me that on that aspect of the case, Mr. Trudeau has a point.
Before getting to that, Professor Mendes discussed at some length that he does not side with the prime minister on the crucial point in the case. Like Ms. Wilson-Raybould, he doesn’t believe that SNC-Lavalin should be allowed to work out a settlement. In his view, the new law exists to encourage companies engaged in corruption to come forward with their crimes. SNC-Lavalin, however, became interested in working something out only once it was clear that it was heading to court.
But Professor Mendes also said that he believed that Mr. Dion misinterpreted the Conflict of Interest Act when he found that the prime minister broke the conflict of interest law. Specifically a section that prohibits public office holders from attempting to influence decisions “to improperly further another person’s private interests.”
Greatly simplified, Mr. Dion drew the obvious conclusion that a deal would be good for SNC-Lavalin’s finances. But he also found that the jobs that could be affected by a criminal conviction are completely entwined with the company’s financial interests. So, he also concluded that even if the prime minister was worried about jobs when pressuring Ms. Wilson-Raybould, he broke the law because the end result of a deal would also benefit SNC-Lavalin.
“But that happens all the time in government,” Professor Mendes said of raising public policy implications of decisions. He said that Mr. Dion “has completely taken out any discretionary review of the public interest.”
He added: “Think of everything the government does that involves the financial interests of companies. Does that constitute a conflict of interest?”
In Professor Mendes’s view, both the new law, which permits settlements in these kind of cases, and the conflict of interest law allow for public interest to be factored into decisions. Mr. Dion, in his view, improperly dismisses that idea.
And while Professor Mendes said the behavior of Mr. Trudeau and his staff toward Ms. Wilson-Raybould certainly raises questions about the independence from politics of criminal prosecutions, he also said that isn’t a conflict of interest question and Mr. Dion was wrong to deal with the issue in his report.
“He’s going way outside his jurisdiction when it comes to that,” he said.
It seems unlikely, however, that Professor Mendes’s counter-take on the ethics commissioner’s report will become the accepted wisdom between now and the election on Oct. 21. And that leaves open the question of how it will affect voters.
Analysts offered a number of scenarios based on that question when I spoke with them this week. But they all agree on one thing: A small shift in Mr. Trudeau’s support could bring an end to his time in office.
[Read: Analysts weighed in on Justin Trudeau’s re-election odds in light of the ethics commissioner’s findings.]
With that, let’s hope that we can put politics back in the freezer again until Labor Day.
—Dan Bilefsky was in Port Alberni, British Columbia — the hometown of two young men who committed three killings, fled across Western Canada and ultimately killed themselves in a remote part of northern Manitoba. He found the ordeal had brought “a sense of dread to Port Alberni, where people fear that the town will now be forever remembered for one thing: murder.”
—A one-woman show by Margaret Trudeau, the mental health advocate and the only Canadian who is both the former wife of and mother of prime ministers, is headed to New York.
—In Opinion, the author Louisa Lim wrote that the “battle over Hong Kong is, in effect, being exported, pitting overseas Chinese communities against each other,” including communities in Canada.
—The International Real Estate column went shopping for a lakeside retreat in Manitoba.
—In August 1619, the first ship carrying slaves landed in the United States. The Times is marking the 400th anniversary with a series of articles. In one of them, Nikole Hannah-Jones makes the case that it took black Americans to make the United States live up to the ideals of its founders.
—The heiress Cordelia Scaife May liked birds and didn’t like immigrants. She used her half-a-billion-dollar fortune to found the anti-immigration movement in the United States and her money remains its lifeblood today.
—Brian X. Chen gave some security experts his phone number. How much they were able to find out about him using it is unnerving.
—Many older people have transportation problems, but they aren’t using the seemingly obvious solution of ride sharing services. Fear and discomfort with technology both play a role.
