U.S. Warship Sails Near Island Claimed by Beijing in South China Sea
BEIJING — A United States Navy warship sailed within 12 nautical miles of an artificial island claimed by China in the South China Sea on Wednesday, an operation that showed a new firmness by the Trump administration in its dealings with Beijing.
The warship, the guided missile destroyer Dewey, passed near Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands, not far from the Philippines, American military officials said.
The operation may tamp down concerns among allies of the United States that the Trump administration has been unwilling to confront China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea as it seeks Beijing’s cooperation on issues like halting North Korea’s nuclear program.
Until the operation on Wednesday, the Pentagon had turned down requests from the United States Pacific Command in Hawaii, under the command of Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., for such maneuvers. It was the first freedom of navigation operation since President Trump took office.
The United States does not recognize China’s claims of sovereignty over the 12 nautical miles surrounding the artificial islands, the conventional limit for territorial waters.
A Pentagon official involved in the operation said the American warship did a “man overboard” rescue drill while passing by the island. The particular exercise was intended to show China that the United States would operate anywhere on the high seas in accordance with international law, the official said.
Mr. Trump was initially reluctant to confront China’s territorial claims once he became president, despite his criticism during the campaign of the Obama administration’s handling of the issue. In an interview with The New York Times in March 2016, Mr. Trump said that Beijing had built in the South China Sea “a military fortress, the likes of which perhaps the world has not seen.”
A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said Thursday that Chinese vessels around the Spratly Islands “identified and warned” the American warship to leave.
Lu Kang, the spokesman, said at a regular briefing Thursday that Beijing was “strongly dissatisfied” with the operation, particularly at a moment when the situation in the South China Sea was “cooling down.” That was an apparent reference to the recent start of direct talks between China and the Philippines, an American ally, over the status of islands both countries claim.
Separately, China’s department of defense accused the United States of spoiling what it called “an important period of development” in the relations between American and Chinese forces.
“This behavior by the United States military is a show of force to promote the militarization in the region, and would very easily lead to accidents on the sea and in the air,” Sr. Col. Ren Guoqiang said in statement.
In the wake of Wednesday’s maneuver, allies will be watching to see how consistent the Trump administration is on the South China Sea, analysts said.
“One operation won’t allay fears about Trump’s transactional approach toward China and its apparent disinterest in defending international and legal rights,” said Euan Graham, an analyst with the Lowy Institute in Australia.
Satellite images suggest that China has placed military hardware like antiaircraft and antimissile systems on the islands it has constructed in the South China Sea.
Maj. Jamie Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, declined to discuss any current maneuvers but said the military was continuing with its freedom of navigation operations, known as Fonops.
“We are continuing regular Fonops, as we have routinely done in the past and will continue to do in the future,” he said in a statement. “All operations are conducted in accordance with international law and demonstrate that the United States will fly, sail and operate wherever international law allows.”
“We have a comprehensive freedom of navigation operations program that seeks to challenge excessive maritime claims in order to preserve the rights, freedoms and uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all nations under international law,” he added.
The naval operation on Wednesday was interpreted by the United States’ allies in the region as a welcome sign of American engagement in the South China Sea.
Even so, Australia, whose economy is highly dependent on exports to China, has declined to participate in the United States-led military operations, arguing that China now controls the Spratly Islands, where it has placed weapons and runways for fighter jets.
“Australia is extremely reluctant to participate in freedom of navigation operations that involve flying over or sailing through the 12 nautical miles around the islands,” said Alan Dupont, a former Australian military intelligence official.
“The Australian government feels it would be provocative and upset China,” Mr. Dupont said. “It feels it would be counterproductive now that China has militarized the islands.”
