Trump Team’s Shifts Jolt Some Allies and Soothe Others
WASHINGTON — President Trump scrambled American diplomacy on two fronts on Friday, delivering a stinging rebuke of Qatar at the very moment his secretary of state was trying to mend fences in the Persian Gulf, while at the same time reaffirming support for NATO two weeks after he had declined to do so.
Unpredictable as always, Mr. Trump’s comments cut in two directions: He appeared to undermine Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who has thrown himself into an effort to mediate a resolution to the bitter dispute between Qatar and several of its neighbors, chiefly Saudi Arabia.
But he also soothed NATO allies by explicitly reaffirming Article 5, the clause that commits members to defend any ally under attack. Mr. Trump conspicuously avoided making that pledge at a meeting at NATO headquarters in Brussels two weeks ago, opening a rift with allies that widened after he pulled the United States out of the Paris climate accord.
Yet the pattern of sudden reversals in the Trump administration’s diplomacy was most pronounced in the Middle East.
On Friday afternoon, Mr. Tillerson called for a “calm and thoughtful dialogue” to resolve the deepening dispute among Sunni Muslim states in the Persian Gulf. Barely an hour later, Mr. Trump’s comments were anything but that. He accused Qatar of being a “funder of terror at a very high level” and demanded that the tiny, energy-rich nation cut off that money flow to rejoin the circle of responsible nations.
“We had a decision to make,” Mr. Trump declared at a Rose Garden news conference with the president of Romania, Klaus Iohannis. “Do we take the easy road or do we take a hard but necessary action?” he said. “We have to stop the funding of terrorism.”
A senior administration official insisted that Mr. Trump was “on the same page” as his secretary of state, even distributing a page to reporters on Air Force One that showed their statements on Qatar side by side. He also disputed that Mr. Trump’s comments about Article 5 represented a reversal, arguing, as the White House has before, that the president had already effectively endorsed it.
But on Qatar, a senior adviser to Mr. Tillerson, R.C. Hammond, suggested a difference in emphasis — if not ultimate goal — between the two men.
“The president is focused on ending terrorism; the secretary is focused on diplomacy that will return G.C.C. focus to fighting terrorism,” he said, referring to the Gulf Cooperation Council, a loose association of mostly Sunni Arab states.
The mixed messages extended to the Pentagon, which issued a statement reaffirming Qatar’s critical role as a military partner to the United States and expressing concern that the deepening instability would hurt the American-led campaign against the Islamic State.
Qatar is home to two major American command posts, including a center from which the United States and its allies conduct their air war on Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria.
“While current operations from Al Udeid Air Base have not been hindered or curtailed, the evolving situation is hindering our ability to plan for longer-term military operations,” said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, naming the large military installation in Qatar.
A senior administration official played down those concerns, saying that the dispute between Qatar and Saudi Arabia would pose a problem to American military operation only if it drags on over time. At the moment, a blockade on land crossings into Qatar mostly threatens food deliveries and sundered families, said the administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Whether deliberately or accidentally, Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Trump appear to have taken on a sort of good-cop, bad-cop role.
For Mr. Tillerson, a former chief executive of Exxon Mobil who has deep contacts in the Persian Gulf, Qatar has emerged as an early test of his diplomatic skills. His approach was to try to lower the temperature on all sides.
“We ask that there be no further escalation by parties in the region,” he said just hours after Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates listed 59 people and a dozen organizations linked to Qatar, including prominent Qatari businessmen, politicians and royalty, as aiding terrorism.
The blacklisting deepened a five-day standoff that has included a cutoff of all diplomatic relations, travel and trade with Qatar, forcing the country to import critical food supplies by air from Turkey and elsewhere.
Mr. Tillerson noted that the standoff has already had serious humanitarian consequences, including food shortages, family separations and children being pulled out of school. Military operations in the region have also been affected, as has the functioning of American and international businesses, he said.
Mr. Tillerson’s initial attempt at negotiations was nearly upended by Mr. Trump, who first inserted himself into the dispute with a series of Twitter posts that seemed to put the United States squarely on the side of the Saudis.
“During my recent trip to the Middle East I stated that there can no longer be funding of Radical Ideology,” he wrote. “Leaders pointed to Qatar — look!”
The president’s remarks on Friday appeared to reinforce that impression. After criticizing Qatar, Mr. Trump lavished praise on Saudi Arabia’s monarch as “my friend, King Salman,” who played host at what the president called a historic summit meeting in Riyadh during his visit there last month. “There has never been anything like it before,” he said, “and perhaps there never will be again.”
But Mr. Trump’s remarks fueled Qatar’s adversaries. In a statement, the United Arab Emirates ambassador to the United States, Yousef al-Otaiba, welcomed the presidents’ comments and said, “Qatar can no longer have it both ways.”
Mr. Tillerson said the emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, had made progress in cutting off funding to groups linked to terrorism. “But he must do more, and he must do it more quickly,” Mr. Tillerson added.
He said the United States supported efforts by the emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah, to resolve the dispute. But Mr. Tillerson called on countries in the region to “immediately take steps to de-escalate the situation.”
Qatari officials have repeatedly denied supporting terrorist groups and say the emirate works closely with Western security agencies to crack down on the financing of terrorism. American officials are dubious of those claims, though they agree that Qatar has made progress.
Inside the administration, Mr. Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis have argued that the United States cannot afford a rupture between Saudi Arabia and its allies in the Middle East, on one side, and Qatar on the other.
On Thursday, the two men had breakfast together and then went to the White House for a meeting with Mr. Trump, who officially offered Mr. Tillerson as a mediator in the dispute.
Mr. Trump’s statement on NATO will make life easier for Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Mattis. The president’s refusal to endorse Article 5 — a reluctance that dates back to the 2016 campaign, when he questioned the underpinnings of the alliance — had strained America’s relationship with its NATO allies at a time when the United States is pressing them to contribute a greater share of troops to the international military force in Afghanistan.
Members of Mr. Trump’s national security team expected him to offer an explicit endorsement during his visit to NATO headquarters two weeks ago. When he did not, it underscored his willingness to deviate from his advisers on core foreign policy principles.
“Shouldn’t be a big deal,” Ian Bremmer, the president of Eurasia Group, a research and consulting firm, tweeted on Friday about Trump’s explicit commitment to Article 5. “But it is.”
