For Right-Wing Italian Youth, a Mission to Disrupt Migration
MILAN — As dawn broke over a quiet suburb, Lorenzo Fiato lugged a silver suitcase packed with windbreakers and anti-seasickness gum out of the bedroom he had decorated with stickers (“Enough Immigration”) and shelves filled with medieval knight toy soldiers.
At the front door, Mr. Fiato, 23, hugged his mother goodbye and set out to catch a flight to Sicily, where he planned to embark on the last leg of what has become Europe’s alt-right odyssey.
It began in May, when Mr. Fiato, a leader of the Italian branch of a European right-wing movement that calls itself identitarian, joined his allies in using an inflatable raft to momentarily delay a ship carrying Doctors Without Borders personnel that was chartered to rescue migrants at sea. The tactic appalled human rights organizations, which argued that the activists, mostly in their 20s, threatened the lives of desperate migrants making the perilous journey across the Mediterranean Sea.
But it also attracted publicity, new members and, identitarians say, at least $100,000 in private donations. That money went to Defend Europe, a project that included as its centerpiece the chartering of a 130-foot ship previously used off the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Fiato and his allies around Europe suspect aid ships of colluding with human traffickers and believe migration amounts to a Muslim invasion. They wanted to disrupt and monitor the operations of rescue vessels and make sure they did not cross into Libyan waters, cooperate with human traffickers or bring more migrants to Europe’s shores.
“I certainly wish them the best,” said Richard B. Spencer, a white nationalist in the United States who is a leader of the so-called alt-right, a far-right movement. “This sounds like a wonderful mission.”
Except that, as of now, Mr. Fiato’s ship still has not come in.
On Thursday morning, the boat was stuck in Egypt, where he said inspectors seemed to be looking for “any misplaced hair” to hold up its arrival. In Italy, members of Parliament have excoriated the mission, and others have wondered if the band of activists might not come under attack by armed smugglers. A Spanish aid group has accused them of being pirates.
“It’s a bad climate,” Mr. Fiato said with a sigh over a beer on Wednesday night in Milan.
A tense atmosphere hangs over much of Italy these days.
While Europe and its leaders are confounded by the waves of migrants in the warm southern months, no country is as exposed as Italy, with its southern islands, miles of coastline and proximity to the smuggling hub of Libya.
Migration has set off political upheaval across the continent, but it has especially dominated Italy’s attention. It has left the government scrambling for solutions, from furnishing Libya with patrol boats, to floating the possibilities of closing Italian ports to ships that do not fly Italian flags, to granting travel visas to migrants so they can go north.
As Italian politicians have physically scuffled over whether to extend citizenship to the children of immigrants born in Italy, the left-leaning government, keenly aware that the issue is fueling the conservative opposition, has grown exasperated by the reluctance across Europe to open up borders and ports and share the burden of a mass migration.
Much of the focus has recently fallen on the ships run by nongovernmental organizations, or N.G.O.s, which according to Italy’s interior minister, Marco Minniti, operate 34 percent of rescue missions in a sea where about 2,000 refugees have drowned this year.
More than 93,000 migrants, the majority sub-Saharan Africans, have been rescued and taken to Italian ports so far this year. There is a concern the arrivals could top 200,000 by year’s end.
Right-wing groups have particularly latched onto an Italian prosecutor in Sicily who, without providing any evidence, began investigating potential collusion between aid groups and human traffickers. This month, human rights groups lashed out after an aid group leaked a draft of a government proposal that would bar N.G.O. ships from entering Libyan territorial waters for rescues, and slow them down by banning them from transferring refugees to bigger vessels.
Mr. Fiato, like some of Italy’s leading right-wing politicians, argues that the aid ships become a magnet for more immigration, and that they end up benefiting smugglers and mobsters who exploit reception centers, all the while costing more lives by drawing more migrants into the water. The United Nations immigration agency called this argument baseless.
In Milan on Wednesday, Mr. Fiato seemed eager to get out to sea. He sat in shorts and a blue shirt at Bar Magenta with his grade school friend and fellow identitarian Lara Montaperto. O
