Damien Cave, our new Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this twice-monthly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
Feng Chongyi spent more than a week stuck in China, barred from leaving while being questioned by the authorities. When I reached him by phone Sunday morning, he sounded elated to be back in Sydney.
“I just got off the plane,” he said, adding with a quick laugh as airport announcements blared behind him: “You’re the first to call.”
For the next half-hour, we talked about his ordeal and how it ended. My colleague Chris Buckley, a New York Times reporter in Beijing, had been among the first to write about it, noting that Professor Feng, a Chinese-born expert on China at the University of Technology Sydney, had often criticized Beijing’s repression of dissent.
Professor Feng is also well known for highlighting China’s growing influence in Australia, and as I listened to him talk about his experience and family, I found myself even more fascinated than before by the evolving relationship between China and Australia.
It’s not a subject that any one story can fully explore, certainly not one as brief as what I wrote about Professor Feng’s return. And it’s not just politics. This week, I brought my family — including my 8-year-old son and 6-year-old daughter — on a food tour of Sydney’s Chinatown. Our guide told us that the Cantonese cuisine that long defined the area was now just one small part of a diversified mix.
Sure, there were the familiar Emperor’s Garden cream puffs.
But we also saw Chinese college students and families enjoying hot pot from Sichuan, Chinese Thai food and Uighur debuts from the Xinjiang region of China.
Food, of course, is often the first touchpoint of diversity — we’re all adventurers with menus in hand. But immigration scholars will tell you the casual interaction does matter. It incentivizes familiarity. In many parts of the United States, including small towns, Chinese and Mexican restaurants preceded bilingual schools and elected representation in local and state politics.
Here too, there seems to be a process working its way out. Australia is a young country, only a few decades out of its White Australia policy, and as one Australian journalist here told me when I first arrived, the pace of multicultural change has been rapid and not fully digested.
This is also not purely an Australia thing; it’s increasingly global. But Australia’s recent debate over Section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act — while clearly many things to many people — looked to this outsider at least partly like a dispute over who gets to define the ground rules for the next phase of the country’s internal argument about its own identity.
Other examples will clearly follow; 18C in fact may be in for another round.
While we wait, here are some stories from The Times — some related to diversity, some not — that I’ve found striking since my last newsletter, and that I hope you’ll enjoy as well.
To get a daily news fix from The New York Times, sign up for our new Morning Briefing: Australia Edition.
As always, share this newsletter if you like it. And tell us what you think at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
George Megalogenis, who has been examining Australia’s changing demographics for more than a decade, wrote this Op-Ed for us arguing that Australia has figured out how to extend its economic winning streak: “large-scale immigration.” It’s a provocative argument in a country that tends to see its economy through the lens of mining or real estate.
______
You may have seen our series on Canadian families welcoming Syrian immigrants (here’s the latest installment). But for those interested in how China tries to control its diaspora worldwide, it’s worth revisiting Dan Levin’s piece about how it works in Canada — where one expert said China “exploits the freedom of Western democracies against Western democracies.”
______
All week I’ve been wondering what the conversation would be like if President Trump and Stephen K. Bannon brought these fine folks to the White House for a chat. Sure, they sued to end the president’s travel ban, but I suspect they’d have some wisdom to share.
_______
You’ll love this Hawaiian scientist-surfer. But you won’t love his findings, or concerns at least, about whether the ocean is spreading antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
______
Get watching! Here’s our monthly roundup of what’s newly available on Netflix Australia for those who have a faster Internet connection that I do. (Random TV question: What’s more jarring, “Stranger Things” or that “Four Corners” investigation of Pauline Hanson?)
If you’re a Melburnian or just visiting, you may want to hurry up and book a reservation at Attica. Ben Shewry’s restaurant was just named to a list of the world’s best eateries, landing at number 32. Brae in Birregurra also made the list, at 44.
We wrote about the awards. And we examined how Melbourne made itself into a food capital (hint: persistent government-organized marketing; it’s a fascinating read).
We’ll have more to tell our subscribers about Ben and his restaurant in the coming weeks, as we get closer to our official Australia debut in May, so stay tuned. Here’s how to subscribe if you haven’t already.
We’d also love to hear from you about food coverage in Australia: When it comes to journalism about eating and drinking, what would you like to see from us? Restaurant criticism? Long reads? Sublime videos?
Send ideas and suggestions to nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
