SYDNEY, Australia — Feng Chongyi said he ran to the airport in Guangzhou on Saturday as soon as he received the message from Chinese officials: Go.
He had been barred from leaving China for just over a week, submitting to questioning whenever Chinese officials felt the need, he said, waiting for a chance to return to Australia.
Here, he has long been a respected academic at the University of Technology Sydney, an expert on China’s repression of political dissent and its growing influence in Australia. His daughter and wife are Australian citizens.
There, in China, where Professor Feng was born, and where he still often travels, he was questioned as a threat to national security.
“Until I got on the plane and got past border control, I was not sure it was real,” Professor Feng said in an interview on Sunday 20 minutes after his overnight flight landed. “The authorities yielded to international pressure — including yours, the media. The media played an essential role in pushing them across the line.”
Professor Feng’s release brings an end to a recent whirlwind of tense negotiations for Australia and China. Last Sunday, the Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, was ending his tour of Australia and finalizing trade deals. Two days later, concerns over Professor Feng’s confinement helped undermine a vote for an extradition treaty that China had been waiting years for Australia to approve.
Now, with President Xi Jinping of China scheduled to visit President Trump in Palm Beach, Fla., in the next week, Chinese officials seem to be clearing away distractions, at least those easily dismissed on this side of the world.
“Obviously we are glad that he’s back,” said John Hugh, a spokesman in Sydney for the Embracing Australian Values Alliance, which has sought to promote free speech and counter the Chinese government’s influence over the ethnic Chinese community in Australia. “It’s a victory for Professor Feng himself, and also a victory for everyone.”
Professor Feng, a legal resident in Australia who still travels on a Chinese passport, would say little about the content of his questioning. “I will not disclose the detail of those unpleasant conversations,” he said.
He suggested that the discussions were frequent and repetitive. “I got bored. I hope they got bored, as well,” he said. “They could call me anytime and have me talk anytime.”
Asked about any conditions on Mr. Feng’s being allowed to leave, Chen Jinxue, a lawyer who represented Mr. Feng while he was in China, said simply, “As I understand it, it may not be convenient for Feng Chongyi to reveal the details of what he was questioned about.”
Mr. Feng seemed to be in good health, and in good spirits, chuckling at the interruption of airport announcements soon after he arrived.
He said he was eager to return to his family. Noting his daughter’s efforts to rally support for his return, he said he was especially eager to see her again.
“She seems to be as brave as me,” he said.
Professor Feng added that despite his confinement, he did not intend to stop traveling to China. “I’m free to come and go, and I will return,” he said. “As I said to my friends — I shall return.”
Still he warned that the impact of his release should be seen as narrow in scope, as there are many others who are not as well known, and are more vulnerable to China’s restrictions and aggressive tactics.
“For anyone who gets in trouble in China, the support of the international community, especially the international media, is essential,” he said. “That is the only thing that will make them care.”
