After a Long Fight, Taiwan’s Same-Sex Couples Celebrate New Marriages
TAIPEI, Taiwan — Typically drab and nondescript, Taipei’s Xinyi District Household Registration office exploded with life and color on Friday morning.
Taiwanese and foreign reporters surrounded the office’s main desk to witness history, as Taiwan became first in Asia to legally recognize same-sex marriages.
While office workers took in the spectacle, one couple after another exercised their new legal right to register their unions. As cameras snapped away, Jennifer Lu, the chief coordinator of the Marriage Equality Coalition Taiwan, politely but firmly kept the news media circus at bay, making sure that the newly recognized newlyweds had enough space.
For Ms. Lu, Friday’s events were the culmination of a two-and-a-half year struggle to obtain marriage rights for Taiwan’s LGBT citizens. The registrations came exactly a week after Taiwan’s legislature made headlines worldwide by voting to recognize same-sex marriage.
Ms. Lu described the period between last Friday’s vote and today’s wedding registrations as “exhausting and overwhelming,” with reporters from around the world constantly seeking comment from her.
Since the historic vote, she said, there has been an outpouring of love and acceptance across Taiwan, both by same-sex couples, their friends and families.
“I’m so moved by the love stories that people have been sharing on the internet,” she said. “Many LGBT people in Taiwan have said that even though they don’t have plans to marry, they now feel accepted by their country.”
Tseng Hui-yu and Wei Li-na were two of the first Taiwanese to get their marriages recognized. The couple, who have been together for a decade, posed for a photo with new identification cards that denoted their married status.
“We’re pretty excited,” Ms. Wei said, noting that they had woken up early for the occasion. “But we’re also pretty tired,” she said, with a laugh.
“We’re very happy,” Ms. Tseng said.
Alongside Ms. Lu, Chi Chia-wei, the white-haired and bespectacled godfather of Taiwan’s gay rights movement, beamed as he took in the scene. Dressed in a bright orange jacket and wearing a rainbow headband and tie, he knew more than anyone how far the movement had come. In 1986, when now-democratic Taiwan was under brutal martial law, Mr. Chi was imprisoned for coming out as gay. Thirty-three years later, his battle is still not over.
“Progress is good,” he said. “More progress is even better.”
Mr. Chi said that Taiwan’s separate-but-equal law for same-sex couples was a step in the right direction, but that more work remained to be done. Instead of having a separate law for gay couples, he said, Taiwan’s civil code should be amended to simply include all couples. The issues of transnational couples and full adoption rights also need the be addressed, he said.
Nevertheless, Friday’s marriage registrations capped three years of hope and disappointment for Taiwan’s LGBT community. The struggle began in earnest in 2016 with the election of president Tsai Ing-wen, the first Taiwanese president to voice approval for same-sex marriage.
As a candidate in 2015, Ms. Tsai expressed support for marriage equality, and her election in 2016 generated excitement among same-sex marriage supporters.
But months after Ms. Tsai assumed the presidency, it appeared that same-sex marriage was not a policy priority. In the 2017 legislative session, Taiwanese conservatives mobilized to oppose any attempt at legalization, causing many lawmakers with Ms. Tsai’s ruling Democratic Progressive Party to withdraw support, leaving the bills in limbo.
But the issue gained sudden urgency in May 2017, when Taiwan’s constitutional court ruled that the civil code, which defines marriage as being between a man and a woman, was unconstitutional on the grounds that it discriminated against same-sex couples. The court gave the Legislative Yuan two years to pass legislation that would address the issue, otherwise after May 24 — Friday — same-sex partners would legally be able to register as married couples.
The law passed last Friday went beyond what the constitutional court demanded. The 2017 court ruling spoke in terms of the right to equality and freedom of marriage, but it did not address equality with respect to building a family, said Margaret Lewis, a law professor at Seton Hall.
“Now the question is whether the court will be asked to rule on how the constitutional right to equality applies to adoption by married couples of the same sex,” she said. “Other issues of concern include whether to legalize surrogacy and changes to laws related to assisted reproductive technology.”
Taiwan’s premier, Su Tseng-chang, is credited with bringing conservative D.P.P. legislators on board before last Friday’s vote. Mr. Su said that while he recognized the current law will need to be improved, it was an important first step.
“Today, Taiwan officially has a law that will allow same-sex couples, some of whom have been in love for decades, to marry,” Mr. Su said.
“We can only guess how things will work out in the future,” he said, “but Taiwan’s democracy is still young and is still finding its way.”
Mr. Chi, the gay rights advocate, echoed that sentiment, saying his work was not complete. He and his partner are not planning to marry at the moment, he said, explaining that they will only marry once full marriage equality is enshrined in Taiwanese law.
“We’ve waited this long,” he said. “We’re not in a hurry.”
