American Exasperation and Australian Humor
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
_____
One of my favorite things about living abroad has always been the way that distance adds a fresh perspective on wherever it is one calls home.
In my case, I often feel as though I never see the United States quite so clearly as I do when I’ve just returned after a long time away, which was the case last week. I was home for a wedding, a bit of work and a little vacation, and at every stop, I found myself marveling at the sheer American-ness of conversations and experiences.
In my last newsletter, I shared a few of my impressions about Australia. What you’ll find below is its American counterpart — what I noticed in one small corner of the U.S. after months away, and what stood out more clearly in part because of my experience in Australia.
Americans Are Exhausted
Love him or hate him, Donald Trump seems to be wearing people out.
Many of the journalists I talked to seemed spent, tired from covering a country that seems to convulse again and again, with each passing week. And among voters on opposite sides of the Trump divide, I heard a lot of exasperation and not a whole lot of understanding.
A few Trump critics I saw at my friend’s wedding chewed over every speech and every new development after the Charlottesville protests; others seemed to have less capacity for continuous outrage, offering little more than an “I know” and a shake of the head, asking how anyone could see any Trump as a positive force.
Meanwhile, Trump supporters I know chose not to engage. One of my brothers, a Trump voter, said he’d expected chaos given that Trump is taking on a broken system. During a long car ride, he told me he figured the news coverage of Charlottesville would just be more of the same, from more of the people who want Trump gone. He never even watched Trump’s controversial speeches (though he may have now after I insisted he watch the raw clips).
What I sensed in that conversation and many others was less a desire to find middle ground than a craving for calm, in a country drowning in political adrenaline.
Empowered, for Good and Ill
On a subway train in Manhattan last week, a petite Asian woman with a thick accent scolded me for not noticing that there was a pregnant woman near the doors who needed a seat.
I quickly got up, effusive with apology. Then I thought: Would that exchange have happened in Sydney?
There was no denying that the woman felt empowered. Once I stood, she started talking to me — loudly — about all the other men in the subway car who had been there longer and seen the mother-to-be and stayed seated. And what could be more American than that?
Australians often remark on the American love affair with individual rights over the collective (it’s what explains American gun laws, they correctly note), and on my trip home, I again saw how much of American life continues to be shaped by that individualist ethos.
Yes, it drives politics. The American propensity for self-empowerment fuels both the white nationalist and anti-racist counter-protester.
But what I found equally striking during this last trip was the degree to which it governs smaller, more intimate interactions. Americans call each other out, often. There’s a comfort with inquiry and confrontation that, coming from another country, seems peculiar — or so it did to me.
Efficiency or Bust
This is a more minor point, but wow, the United States — or rather New York — sure does strive for maximum efficiency.
I almost forgot what it was like to get dirty looks for walking too slowly on Manhattan sidewalks. I found it odd that at wine stores, restaurants and cafes the staff eagerly attended to my every need, delivering quick, friendly service, consistently.
I won’t delve into the possible reasons (yes, there are many, and I’m not concluding which country’s service economy is better or worse overall) but here’s what hit me at one point: Sydneysiders are competitive about anything having to do with sports. New Yorkers are competitive with customer care.
Continuing the Conversation
