Top 5 players to suit up for the Giants and Jets
   Fifty-five players have repped both Gang Green and Big Blue. 
   We remind you these co-tenants have never struck a deal with each other, meaning members of this crew big enough to fill out an entire roster made the jump on their own accord. 
   Quarterback Davis Webb became the latest, signing with the Jets practice squad Tuesday after shockingly being waived by the Giants this past weekend. 
   Let’s take a look at the top-5 players to suit up for both teams. 
   This offensive tackle spent his entire career in East Rutherford and unlike most others on this list, was a force with both squads. Elliot won a Super Bowl with the Giants in 1991 before signing a five-year deal with the Jets five years later. You may remember his “Monday Night Miracle” catch — the only pass he ever caught — in a 2000 duel with the Dolphins his team eventually won in overtime, 40-37. 
   Marshall, meanwhile, is mostly remembered for his dominant stretch with the Giants in which he won two Super Bowls in 1987 and 1991 while totaling 79.5 sacks over 10 seasons. Marshall enjoyed a cup of coffee with the Jets and Giants division rival Washington before hanging ‘em up in 1994. 
   Only one Hall of Famer played for both franchises. Maynard was originally drafted by the Giants but was released after just one season. After a stint in the CFL, Maynard became the first player to sign with the New York Titans (who then became the Jets in 1963). He became Joe Namath’s favorite target along the way to Super Bowl III and played a key role in the Jets winning it all nearly 50 years ago. 
   No one can forget the moment Eli Manning connected with Burress to ruin the Patriots’ undefeated season in the final seconds of Super Bowl XLII. The stud wide receiver then accidentally shot himself in the leg at a Manhattan night spot, which forced him to miss two seasons while serving a prison sentence for having a fire arm that was not licensed in state of New York. After getting out of prison, the Jets signed Plax for the 2011 season. 
   A pivotal cog on the Giants’ second Super Bowl team (he was a backup on their first) had the pleasure of playing under the legendary Bill Parcells for five seasons as a Giant and two more as a Jet (1997-98), his final two in the NFL. Johnson served as a defensive line coach with the Jets for two seasons before being fired in 2016. 
   Speaking of Parcells — sign him and Bill Belichick to reunite and coach this squad.   
