How Does Australia See Itself?
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email. Here’s where to find all our Australia and New Zealand coverage.
______
Several newsletters ago, I shared 5 Things I Love About Australia (and One I Loathe) then asked all of you for your own thoughts.
Hundreds of insightful comments hit our inbox. We debated what to do with your responses, but we knew we wanted to include art. Ultimately, we decided to go with someone who could incorporate several ideas into a single experience: Ilya Milstein.
Ilya an artist from Melbourne, via Italy, who now lives in New York.
But he knows and loves Australia and he worked with our art directors in New York to create a cityscape from a selection of reader submissions. That’s the image above, but to make sure the details aren’t lost, readers can zoom in with a new digital format designed for immersion.
Check out the full piece on your computer or your phone.
But for a sample, here are a handful of close-ups with the comments that inspired them.
___
 The colour, beauty and richness of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture. — Phil Johnston
___
The classless nature of pubs in Australia. — Barton Quilkey
___
Herds of Emus. Hundreds of them out by Booligal or Ivanhoe. — Davis Straub
___
Universal health care. — ‘Kurt van der Walde
___
King George Whiting grilled with chips and a lemon wedge. — Andrew Browne
___
But wait, you’re not done yet! Now, click or scroll through again and find some of Ilya’s own additions.
See, for example, if you can identify the statue at the center of the piece. There are other hidden winks to Australiana as well.
I’ll share some of them in next week’s newsletter, but feel free to send your guesses and feedback to nytaustalia@nytimes.com.
We also hope you’ll share the piece — and this newsletter (sign-up) — with those who might enjoy a version of Australia that looks nothing like Canberra.
Seriously, it’s mostly meant to be fun, and another thank you to all of our readers who make this newsletter and The New York Times such a vibrant community.
One more thing: We really wish we could have found a way to assign art for all of your input, but alas, we’d need a museum for that!
Now here are our stories of the week, from Australia and beyond, plus our recommendations for what to stream this month.
______
Let’s start local this week, because we have a lot to highlight.
We’ve been trying to double down on context, deep reporting and an international perspective and we had three pieces this week that exemplify that:
1. Our examination of Peter Dutton’s au pair scandal. Australia has given “God powers” to its immigration ministers allowing Mr. Dutton to make an already opaque immigration system even more vulnerable to abuse. Few other developed democracies do it this way. We explain how it happened.
2. Is the way Australia funds the arts a recipe for mediocrity? That’s the provocative question at the heart of our deep dive into government funding for the performing arts.
3. Australia wants to take government surveillance to the next level. In Opinion, Lizzie O’Shea writes about Canberra’s decryption efforts, noting that “Australia, which has no Bill of Rights, is a logical place to test new strategies for collecting intelligence that can later be adopted elsewhere.”
______
The New York Times Opinion section published a bombshell today, taking the rare step of publishing an anonymous Op-ed from a senior official in the Trump administration.
The piece should be read in its entirety, but it lays out the ways that people inside the administration are doing everything they can to protect against what the author describes as Trump’s amorality, bad instincts and short attention span.
The Opinion editors are taking questions from readers. Our reporters are covering it as news and adding context from Washington.
There’s also a robust discussion on it going on in our NYT Australia Facebook group, which you should join, of course.
______
President Trump’s other recent enemies include big tech companies like Google, which he has accused of suppressing positive news about him. Here’s an explainer on how search really works, or at least as much as we know.
And how well do you trust your disinformation instincts? We made a quiz that asks you to separate authentic Facebook posts from fakes.
Then there’s the story of Steve Jobs and his daughter. A nuanced family portrait or a hit job? 
______
Now for a couple more pieces worth subscribing for (hint hint).
• Want to hack your finances and quit working? The millennials are doing it and of course there’s an acronym: FIRE. It stands for financial independence, retire early.
• Hello, is it zzzs you’re looking for? Lionel Richie has some fantastic bedding to sell you. “I’m in the bedroom,” Mr. Richie said, referring to his many romantic songs. “At least use my sheets.”
Looking for something to watch on Netflix? Here’s our monthly guide. I’m just finishing up “The Americans,” which all feels a little too relevant at the moment.
I’m looking forward to something else. Maybe “Paddington 2”?
