Nice to Meet You, Australia. Who Are You Again?
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email. Here’s where to find all our Oceania coverage.
______
One of the things I think a lot about, as we plan coverage and as I talk to everyone from prime ministers to farmers is: What does Australia want to be? For its own citizens, and the world?
It’s a bit existential, sure, but many of us are grinding our minds to grasp how this country, or maybe the world, is changing and re-arranging the order of what matters most.
Sometimes journalism can help by unearthing hints of a country’s direction. There are many ways to dig around for clues about such things — and this week we explored a few of them.
Sometimes you get out in the streets... 
If you read Isabella Kwai and Besha Rodell’s piece about Sydney’s struggle over nightlife and the lockout laws, you’ll meet a wide array of Sydneysiders talking about what kind of city they want.
Their views on when government should intervene and when it should not are by no means universal, but the debate raises interesting questions about the way a local issue can feed into a sense of national and international identity.
Does Sydney want to be a big global city like New York or Hong Kong where anything goes (at least in some places) and officialdom reacts to trouble as it emerges? Or does it want to prioritize prevention, safety and perhaps the calmer quality of life found in smaller cities?
There are some who clearly want the latter, and who expect government to hold the line on everything from drinking to population growth. But as was the case with the argument over the Everest advertising on the Opera House, there is also a surging constituency in Sydney that’s tired of business as usual.
They want government to reconsider how things work. They are the ones who (as we wrote last weekend) also tipped the Liberal Party in Wentworth.
Sometimes you talk to officials...
When I asked Kevin Rudd, the former prime minister, what he thought Australians wanted their country to be in an interview this week, he had a quick answer: “Australians don’t know what they want.”
He argued that the country should embrace the status of becoming “a creative middle power,” meaning that it should aim to grow its population to around 50 million, and begin to see itself in the same category as the United Kingdom and France.
He pointed out that Australia has the 12th largest economy in the world. I pointed out that it also just surpassed Switzerland to become the world’s richest nation, measured by median wealth per adult.
“That brings responsibilities,” he said.
Would a Labor government become more externally focused? Is the country becoming more willing to play a larger role?
Mr. Rudd mostly demurred, choosing instead to explain that Australia’s national psyche was still wrapped up in a history defined by distance and reliable alliances with major powers — first Britain, then the United States.
Breaking away from that position, even when the United States is becoming more unpredictable, is still a major challenge.
“Australians don’t take themselves seriously as a regional and global power,” he said, “because they don’t think anyone else would.”
Sometimes you ask New York Times readers...
Here’s one thing we do know: Australians are extremely proud of their compulsory voting system and want the world to know about it.
When we asked our readers about how Australian elections are run, nearly a thousand people responded, sharing stories of their own voting experiences, explaining why voting should be easy and encouraged everywhere — and of course, sharing details of the beloved “democracy sausage.”
But I figured I’d add a couplemore worthwhile responses from Australian readers about the compulsory voting system that didn’t fit into the article.
— Diane Smith
— Stuart Page
Australians often talk about not wanting to self-promote or even celebrate their own accomplishments, but clearly there are areas where confidence comes easily and is well-deserved.
As the country moves closer to a federal election, there will be more signals pointing to Australia’s urges and mood — the vibe, as fans of “The Castle” would say — and we’ll continue to try and put what’s happening into context.
As always, you can share your own thoughts by emailing us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com and by joining our NYT Australia Facebook group.
Now here are a few other stories from The Times that you shouldn’t miss, along with a recommendation.
______
I usually start with news, but our 36 Hours feature is a staple of useful travel advice for cities all over the world (I did 36 Hours in Havana a couple of years ago), so this Singapore guide promises to be worthwhile.
Maybe it’s also time for us to do something similar or more ambitious for cities in Australia. Where do you think we should we start?
______
Speaking of useful, our tech critic is a big fan of the new iPhone XR. On a side note, it’s interesting to see that Apple is curating its news app with actual humans rather than algorithms. Long live editors!
Don’t miss our story about President Trump’s iPhone habits either; turns out he’s using phones that can be spied on by Russia and China.
And Google is in the hot seat. The company protected three male executives accused of sexual misconduct over the past decade. One — Andy Rubin, the creator of Android — was paid a $90 million exit package. Read our investigation.
______
Let’s assume you saw the news about the pipe bombs sent to critics of President Trump. Investigators now believe many of the devices were sent from Florida.
In this Op-Ed, Eyal Press explains how individual acts of terrorism can grow from inflammatory rhetoric.
It’s called “stochastic terrorism,” he writes, “in which mass communications, including social media, inspire random acts of violence that according to one description “are statistically predictable but individually unpredictable.”
______
A few highlights from around the country and the region...
• Aboriginal Rangers Face a Sisyphean Task: Waves of Trash. David Maurice Smith traveled to a remote stretch of the Northern Territory to photograph and report on the Aboriginal Australians trying to save their coastline from heaps of garbage.
• Campaign Contribution Raises Concerns About China’s Meddling: It’s the latest in a series of scandals that suggest New Zealand is vulnerable to political interference at a time when China is seeking greater influence throughout the Pacific.
• Paradise Threatened: Fiji’s War Against Climate Change. How the island nation is struggling with the issue that Australia’s leaders seem determined to ignore.
• Kisumé Promises Luxe Sushi in Melbourne, Mostly for Instagram: Besha Rodell’s latest review includes a dash of disappointment: “Given Australia’s incredible seafood, the general lack of diversity in the country’s sushi offerings is surprising.”
It’s time again for Sculpture by the Sea in Sydney, with amazing artwork set up on the Bondi to Bronte coastal walk — but if you’re feeling ambitious or just eager to get away from the crowds, keep walking south.
The stretch of boardwalk on the way to Coogee that had been ruined by storms has been renovated and finally re-opened. It’s gorgeous and calm and nearly devoid of gawking tourists. Enjoy!
One more thing: Don’t miss our photo feature from Coober Pedy, about the culture of living beneath the ground in Australia’s punishing desert. Tamara Merino captured life beneath the earth.
Here’s a taste:
