Vladimir Putin, in First Remarks on Russian Protests, Warns of Potential Chaos
ARKHANGELSK, Russia — Breaking five days of silence — and a virtual Soviet-style blackout on state news media — over the biggest protests in Russia in years, President Vladimir V. Putin responded publicly on Thursday to the nationwide anticorruption demonstrations with a familiar message: après moi, le déluge.
Speaking in the northern port of Arkhangelsk at an international forum on Arctic issues, Mr. Putin defended his record on fighting corruption and warned that such outbursts, if uncontained, could lead to chaos akin to that spawned by the Arab Spring uprisings.
Mr. Putin did not mention Aleksei A. Navalny, the opposition leader who called for the demonstrations and who would like to oppose the president in the March 2018 election. But Mr. Putin left little doubt to what, or to whom, he was referring when he called the marches part of a presidential campaign.
After accusing unidentified “political forces” of using public concern about corruption to promote their own “selfish interests,” Mr. Putin said this would only end in chaos if allowed to continue.
“We well know, and I want to direct your attention to the fact, that this instrument was used in the beginning of the so-called Arab Spring. We know very well what this led to, to what bloody events it led to in this region,” he said. “We likewise know very well that this was one of the inciting motives and pretexts for the coup d’état in Ukraine. We also know well into what chaos these events sunk our neighbor, Ukraine.”
Presiding over what some critics portray as a Mafia-like government that has conferred vast riches on a select few friends and associates of the president, Mr. Putin presented himself as a stalwart corruption fighter.
“Personally, I am in favor of having questions about the fight against corruption always at the center of public attention,” Mr. Putin said in answer to questions by Geoff Cutmore of CNBC, who moderated the closing session of the forum.
Mr. Putin is expected to win a fourth term handily, even though he has yet to confirm that he will run for re-election. Mr. Navalny has vowed to run against him despite a conviction on fraud charges — widely dismissed as politically motivated — that would technically disqualify him.
The protests were largely inspired by a video released by Mr. Navalny accusing Prime Minister Dmitri A. Medvedev of amassing estates, vineyards and yachts through a corrupt scheme of charities and shell companies.
In a show of support, Mr. Putin took Mr. Medvedev along on a tour of the Arctic before attending the forum in Arkhangelsk.
Mr. Putin also dismissed Western calls to release people who were detained during the protests and criticism of heavy-handed police tactics toward the demonstrators. An estimated 1,400 people were detained across Russia, more than 1,000 of them in central Moscow.
“We consider such calls on Russia as purely politicized, with the aim of exerting pressure on the country’s internal political life,” Mr. Putin said. He repeated the accusation that the West uses a double standard on human rights issues, noting that the French police recently shot dead a Chinese man in Paris.
Asked whether he would like to meet President Trump at a meeting of the Arctic Council this year, Mr. Putin said he would “be happy to participate in such an event” and, failing that, would like to meet him at a regular meeting of the Group of 20.
“There are many questions. They have ripened over a long time — in the sphere of economics, the sphere of security, the sphere of regional conflicts,” Mr. Putin said. “We are ready for this discussion, but the other side has to show good will and readiness to work constructively.”
News programs on state-controlled television, which had not reported on the demonstrations, had to pivot sharply after Mr. Putin’s remarks on the protests.
In a report on the Arctic conference, a correspondent for Rossiya 24, a round-the-clock news channel whose viewers had not previously been informed of any protests, noted matter-of-factly that “there was also a question about Sunday’s protests.”
And in a rare reference to protests in Moscow by state news media, a talk show on the state-controlled Channel One featured pro-Kremlin statements spliced with video footage of police officers in the United States, Italy and the Netherlands attacking protesters with clubs, water cannons and dogs — and film of unarmed police officers calmly carrying away a demonstrator in Moscow.
