SYDNEY, Australia — Officials in Minneapolis said on Thursday that Justine Damond, an unarmed Australian woman killed last weekend by one of the city’s police officers, should not have been shot. The police were responding to a 911 call by Ms. Damond, who had reported an episode she said she feared was a sexual assault.
Here are some major questions the case presents:
Why doesn’t the officer have to testify or talk about what happened?
Mohamed Noor, 31, the officer who fired the shot that killed Ms. Damond, declined to be interviewed by investigators. His lawyer has not indicated when, if ever, that would happen. The state agency investigating the shooting said that under the law, it cannot compel the officer’s testimony. As citizens, police officers have the same Fifth Amendment right to remain silent, experts said.
Minneapolis Police Chief Janeé Harteau said on Thursday that she hoped Officer Noor would share his version of events with investigators. “There are questions that need to be answered,” she said. “And he’s the only one who has those answers.”
Why was the officer’s body camera not on? Is that typical?
During the shooting on Saturday, neither Officer Noor nor his partner, Officer Matthew Harrity, had their body cameras activated when they encountered Ms. Damond, 40, in an alley behind her home. The dashboard camera of their squad car was also off. Officer Noor may have violated department policy by not turning on his body camera before firing his weapon.
The Minneapolis Police Department’s policy and procedure manual indicates that body cameras should be activated if an officer is using force. If the camera is not activated during the use of force, the officer should turn it on “as soon as it is safe to do so,” the manual says.
Chief Harteau said that she believed the body camera should have been activated and that the department was examining its policy and looking into “new technological advancements to avoid human error.”
“We’ve had the cameras for about eight months,” she said. “It’s not second nature for officers to put those cameras on yet.”
How often do foreigners get caught up in police shootings, and does that change how an investigation is carried out?
Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, said it was uncommon for foreigners to get caught up in police shootings in the United States. If a foreigner is involved, that does not change the nature of the investigation, but brings more visibility to an episode, Mr. Wexler said.
“It’s not usually the case that someone from another country finds themselves in this kind of situation,” Mr. Wexler said.
He continued: “I think why this has received so much attention is because of this person’s background and that the police officer involved is from Somalia. It’s an unusual circumstance.”
What’s the conviction rate for police officers who fatally shoot people? Why is it so low? 
The United States does not keep a national database of deadly shootings at the hands of the police, but even incomplete statistics show hundreds occur every year, far more than in Australia. But very few result in convictions. Experts say that a Supreme Court decision, Graham v. Connor, in 1989 states that an officer’s use of force must be “objectively reasonable.”
“If the officer feared for their life, then they would be ruled justified in using force or deadly force in this case,” Mr. Wexler said. “Prosecutors have been reluctant to bring charges against police officers because the juries have been reluctant to convict police officers because it ultimately boils down to whether they felt the officer was in fear for their life. Juries tend to believe police, tend to look at them and see that they have a difficult job.”
In cases like this, the question will be, What was the danger that this officer perceived that he felt justified in using deadly force?
 Why did the police not show up immediately after Ms. Damond called 911 to report a possible assault? 
Justine Damond first called the police at 11:27 p.m. on Saturday. She called again at 11:35 p.m., saying that officers had not arrived. The police arrived at the scene several minutes later.
“There are times in the night that you may have calls waiting, meaning they can’t dispatch a unit because no one is available,” Mr. Wexler said. “Some calls it may take longer to get to than others. This may be one of them.”
