MELBOURNE, Australia — A bag marked with a swastika and containing a pig’s head was left at the front gate of an Islamic school in Brisbane, Australia, this week.
The police were called to the school, the Islamic College of Brisbane, on Wednesday after the bag was discovered by a groundskeeper and a teacher. The school is one of only two Islamic schools in the state of Queensland.
Ray Barrett, the school’s principal, said that a security camera recorded the episode. Two youths dropped the bag out the window of a blue car at 11:23 p.m. on Tuesday, he said.
Pigs’ heads are commonly used in hate crimes. Most Muslims do not eat pork because the Quran forbids it. Last year, vandals defaced a mosque with graffiti in the state of South Australia, using swastikas and neo-Nazi phrases.
Dr. Barrett said on Wednesday that the security video was being analyzed to determine the license plate of the car and that the police were making progress in the investigation.
“DNA samples are being crosschecked with other samples,” he said.
Islamophobia has been a topic of discussion in Australia recently.
Yassmin Abdel-Magied, a Muslim activist and former television host, announced that she was leaving the country after one of her Facebook posts set off a storm of criticism. She called for citizens to remember Syrians, Palestinians and the detainees at Australia’s offshore detention centers on Anzac Day, a holiday that commemorates Australians who died in overseas wars. She has also said that Islam “is the most feminist religion.”
Ms. Abdel-Magied attended the Islamic College of Brisbane. “I’m so, so sorry we have to live in a world where kids can’t go to a school in Australia without being shamed and threatened,” she said on Wednesday, responding to news of the episode.
Dr. Barrett dismissed the idea that the episode was related to Ms. Abdel-Magied or that it represented something broader about Australia’s relationship with Muslims.
“The fact that this was half past 11 at night and in a bag — it’s obviously not targeted at students for some shock horror,” he said.
In a Facebook post, the school’s acting chairman, Ali Kadri, laid blame on some politicians and commentators, saying, “Right-wing extremists including some politicians and shock jocks who demonize Islamic schools are responsible for this.”
A report about Islamophobia in Australia said that 243 incidents had occurred between September 2014 and December 2015. About 32 percent of respondents in a recent Western Sydney University study said they had “negative” feelings toward Muslims.
