The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• Another Australian Greens Party deputy leader resigns.
• A theatrical antiterrorism announcement from the prime minister.
• A man walking across the country for the rights of Indigenous Australians reaches New South Wales.
• “Game of Thrones” fans get upset after a cable provider’s services crash.
In May, she made headlines around the world by becoming the first Australian to breast-feed a child in the federal Parliament, for which she was praised by Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook. But on Tuesday, Senator Larissa Waters, deputy co-leader of the Australian Greens Party, announced that she was “devastated” to be resigning after she disclosed her previously unknown Canadian citizenship. Under Section 44 of the Australian Constitution, citizens of other countries are not eligible to run for federal Parliament.
“It is with great shock and sadness that I have discovered that I hold dual citizenship of Australia and Canada,” she said. “I just want to apologize to my party and to all the wonderful Queenslanders I’ve been so proud to represent in the last six years,” she said, her voice choking with emotion, in an afternoon news conference.
Ms. Waters had been a senator for the Greens since 2011 and a deputy leader since 2015. Born to Australian parents in Canada, Ms. Waters said that she had sought legal advice after the resignation last week of Scott Ludlam, the other deputy co-leader, which sent the political world spinning. Mr. Ludlam had discovered that he held New Zealand citizenship after a legal expert contacted him about the constitutional conflict.
The resignations of two of the Green Party’s most popular and senior politicians was a double whammy for supporters, many of whom said they were heartbroken by the revelations.
Others were exasperated by what seemed to be yet another vetting oversight that should have been caught early in the campaign process.
Richard Di Natale, the leader of the Greens, said that the party had “committed to an urgent root-and-branch review of our processes.”
Ms. Waters said that she would continue to work with politicians to advance environmental causes.
“I still have unshakable hope for our common future on this planet,” she said, finishing her statement on an optimistic note. “Our movement is so much bigger than any one person, and we will win in the end.”
And for some supporters, who implored Ms. Waters to renounce her Canadian citizenship and run again in the next election, the door remains open for a future run.
The rhetoric from a national security announcement by Australia’s prime minister on Monday was nothing out of the ordinary.
“We have to stay ahead of the threat of terrorism,” Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull declared, as he has many times this year, during the announcement giving the country’s defense force more powers to combat domestic terrorism. “We have to constantly act to improve our ability to keep Australians safe.”
What was unusual was the backdrop against which Mr. Turnbull made the remarks.
“Our enemies are agile and innovative,” he said while surrounded by Special Operations soldiers wearing gas masks and full camouflage gear and holding machine guns at Holsworthy Barracks in Sydney.
Mr. Turnbull’s message was somewhat lost in the chatter on social media afterward as people, including members of the opposition Labor Party, questioned whether the staging had been taken too far.
The shadow minister for defense, Richard Marles, told the local news media that the prime minister had politicized the military by posing with heavily armed commandos for a televised news conference.
“I think the Australian people can well see a prop when it is presented,” Mr. Marles said. “They can sniff it from a mile away, and they will judge people accordingly.”
Government unveils new national security plan
The day after Mr. Turnbull announced the new measures “to keep Australians safe,” the federal government unveiled its new super ministry, modeled on Britain’s Home Office but quite different from the United States’ Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Turnbull described the move as the most significant change to Australia’s national security agencies in 40 years and said it reflected the complex security environment countries now find themselves in.
The new Home Affairs portfolio — a centralized office of national intelligence — will be led by the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, and include immigration, border protection, domestic security and law enforcement agencies.
Mr. Turnbull said the new portfolio would enable Mr. Dutton, who is expected to be appointed minister for home affairs next year, to have responsibility for crucial agencies.
“We need these reforms not because the system is broken but because our security environment is evolving quickly, it is becoming more complex, it is likely to remain so for the foreseeable future,” Mr. Turnbull said. He added that the shake-up was aimed at staying ahead of a rapidly evolving threat.
Meeting the prime minister might require some finagling, but one man is walking across Australia to try to do so. Clinton Pryor of Perth is walking toward Sydney on his way to Parliament in Canberra to champion rights for Indigenous Australians.
“I want to tell the prime minister to give elders the full control over the community,” Mr. Pryor wrote on his website, where he describes himself as a “Wajuk, Balardung, Kija and a Yulparitja man from the West.”
Mr. Pryor, worried that government interference will lead to the defunding of services for Indigenous Australian communities, wants to ask Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull to “give us a treaty and let us live our life how we always have done.”
His crossing into New South Wales comes during a week in which Indigenous issues are high on the political agenda. On Monday, a panel set up by the prime minister urged that a referendum be held to vote on whether to establish a body to represent Indigenous Australian interests.
The body would allow “the First Peoples of Australia to speak to the Parliament and to the nation about the laws and policies that concern them,” the panel said.
Although in line with calls from the Uluru Statement From the Heart to establish “a First Nations voice enshrined in the Constitution,” it did not address its broader requests.
Mr. Pryor began his journey at Heirisson Island in September and is about 4,700 kilometers, or more than 2,900 miles, into his walk. He has meticulously documented his journey online through maps and time sheets and, of course, on Twitter. Here are a few highlights.
Northern Territory, December 
South Australia, January
South Australian coast, April
Victoria, June
New South Wales, July
[5:05 a.m.]
Sometimes you do the right thing and are punished for it.
For those Australian “Game of Thrones” viewers who decided to pony up and purchase a Foxtel digital subscription — one of the few legal ways for Australians to watch the series on the same day it airs in the United States — the Season 7 premiere was a literal nonevent, after the cable provider’s online and on-demand services crashed.
In a bashful Facebook post, Foxtel apologized to its digital customers, blaming “unprecedented demand” for its services going down.
“We are devastated that some customers experienced technical issues tonight,” said Bruce Meagher, a Foxtel spokesman.
Last year, when the sixth season of “Game of Thrones” premiered, it was revealed that Australia was the world’s worst offender of pirating the show. According to TorrentFreak, the country accounted for 13 percent of the global torrent traffic for that episode.
Foxtel has aggressively pursued several Federal Court cases to try to block piracy-streaming websites in Australia. In 2016, it successfully forced Australia’s internet service providers to block the Pirate Bay, a notorious torrent hub.
The cable provider’s disastrous night — which followed its monthslong “Game of Thrones” promotional campaign — has left fans of the series wondering what to do next.
The “Game of Thrones” premiere date “was known for over a year,” one Facebook user commented, in response to Foxtel’s post. “What is ‘unprecedented’ about the most watched show in the world premiering after a year’s gap?”
“Get ready for more ‘unprecedented demand’ every Monday for the next 7-8 weeks,” the man continued.
