Senator Who Made Headlines for Breast-Feeding Resigns. Also  Malcolm Turnbull’s Theatrical Security Announcement.
The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• Another Australian Greens Party deputy leader resigns.
• A theatrical antiterrorism announcement from the prime minister.
• A man walking across the country for the rights of Indigenous Australians reaches New South Wales.
• “Game of Thrones” fans get upset after a cable provider’s services crash.
In May, she made headlines around the world by becoming the first Australian to breast-feed a child in the federal Parliament, for which she was praised by Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook. But on Tuesday, Senator Larissa Waters, deputy co-leader of the Australian Greens Party, announced that she was “devastated” to be resigning after she disclosed her previously unknown Canadian citizenship. Under Section 44 of the Australian Constitution, citizens of other countries are not eligible to run for federal Parliament.
“It is with great shock and sadness that I have discovered that I hold dual citizenship of Australia and Canada,” she said. “I just want to apologize to my party and to all the wonderful Queenslanders I’ve been so proud to represent in the last six years,” she said, her voice choking with emotion, in an afternoon news conference.
Ms. Waters had been a senator for the Greens since 2011 and a deputy leader since 2015. Born to Australian parents in Canada, Ms. Waters said that she had sought legal advice after the resignation last week of Scott Ludlam, the other deputy co-leader, which sent the political world spinning. Mr. Ludlam had discovered that he held New Zealand citizenship after a legal expert contacted him about the constitutional conflict.
The resignations of two of the Green Party’s most popular and senior politicians was a double whammy for supporters, many of whom said they were heartbroken by the revelations.
Others were exasperated by what seemed to be yet another vetting oversight that should have been caught early in the campaign process.
Richard Di Natale, the leader of the Greens, said that the party had “committed to an urgent root-and-branch review of our processes.”
Ms. Waters said that she would continue to work with politicians to advance environmental causes.
“I still have unshakable hope for our common future on this planet,” she said, finishing her statement on an optimistic note. “Our movement is so much bigger than any one person, and we will win in the end.”
And for some supporters, who implored Ms. Waters to renounce her Canadian citizenship and run again in the next election, the door remains open for a future run.
The rhetoric from a nation
