Mortar Fire Breaks Syria Cease-Fire Negotiated by Russia and Turkey
BEIRUT, Lebanon — A cease-fire negotiated between Syrian rebels and government forces in the country’s war-battered northwest was on shaky ground after intermittent bombing and shelling resumed overnight Thursday in Idlib Province, the country’s last piece of rebel-held territory.
Russia and Turkey, two of the dominant foreign powers in the area, had negotiated the cease-fire between the groups. It took effect on Wednesday, and was aimed at ending more than six weeks of fighting, bombing and shelling as the Syrian government moved to reclaim parts of the northwest.
But amid sporadic breaches of the agreement, the Turkish foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, told reporters on Thursday that “it is not possible” to call it a “full cease-fire right now.”
“Russia and Iran as guarantor countries should put pressure” on the Syrian government “for the attacks to stop,” Mr. Cavusoglu added. “They should fulfill their responsibilities.”
The terms of the cease-fire remained unclear, and neither Turkey nor Russia said how long it was supposed to last.
Syrian residents of Idlib and the surrounding countryside said the airstrikes and shelling that had hounded them day and night had quieted considerably. But shelling on the neighboring Hama area breached the cease-fire overnight Thursday, residents said. Airstrikes also resumed around the area of Jabal al Zawiya, civilians and activists said.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, the Britain-based war monitor, said that pro-government airstrikes on Idlib and Hama, which destroyed many hospitals, schools and homes in the pro-government offensive, had declined overnight Thursday. But it counted about 55 airstrikes between early Thursday morning and the early afternoon, as well as artillery shelling that killed four people.
Despite the announced cease-fire, a doctor at one hospital, Omar Ibrahim, said the hospital was continuing to receive people wounded by airstrikes on Thursday.
“It is calmer compared to the past few days,” he said, “but still too early to say how long it’ll last.”
On Thursday morning, the Turkish Defense Ministry said Syrian government forces had attacked a Turkish military observation post in Idlib, hitting it with mortar fire 35 times.
“We believe that was deliberate,” Mr. Cavusoglu said, adding that three soldiers had been slightly wounded. He said Turkey would “do what is necessary” if such attacks continued.
Russia’s Defense Ministry said on Thursday that Russian jets had bombed forces it called terrorists in Idlib four times after the Turkish military outpost was shelled.
The government offensive to retake Idlib, one of the last areas of Syria outside the control of President Bashar al-Assad after eight years of civil war, has displaced hundreds of thousands of people from their homes, killed hundreds of civilians and made it nearly impossible for people there to find shelter or medical care.
Idlib is home to about three million people, mostly civilians, including some who came to the province as a last resort after refusing to surrender to the government in their own regions. The population also includes a mix of extremist and more moderate rebel groups.
Turkey maintains some control over much of Syria’s northwest, with military outposts in Idlib, and a de-escalation deal between with Russia had kept the Syrian government from invading the area until recently.
But Turkey had not ousted a rebel group with ties to Al Qaeda that dominates Idlib, Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, as the deal stipulated, and Russia was apparently no longer willing to restrain pro-government forces.
