U.S. Warplanes in Syria Hit Pro-Government Militia Convoy
WASHINGTON — American warplanes in Syria attacked a pro-government convoy on Thursday after it ignored warnings and violated a restricted zone around a base where United States and British Special Forces train Syrian rebels to fight the Islamic State, Pentagon officials said.
The American strike, corroborated by both pro- and anti-government fighters on the ground, was at least the third time in recent months that the United States military has attacked forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.
On Thursday, American officials said, more than 20 vehicles drove within 18 miles of the al-Tanf base in southern Syria housing the American and British Special Forces, breaching the so-called deconfliction zone radius around the encampment.
Low-flying American aircraft buzzed the convoy and fired a warning strike, trying to get the vehicles to reverse course, the Pentagon officials said, but when the convoy continued, the planes opened fire.
Syrian opposition fighters said there were numerous casualties and several vehicles were hit, including at least four tanks.
In a second encounter on Thursday, Pentagon officials said, a Syrian SU-22 fighter-bomber that had entered the deconfliction zone was intercepted by a pair of F-22 fighter jets, but it was not fired upon and left the area.
American officials described the actions as protective responses, rather than a military escalation by the United States.
“We are not increasing our role in the Syrian civil war, but we will defend our troops,” Defense Secretary Jim Mattis told reporters after meeting with the Swedish defense minister at the Pentagon.
There was no immediate comment on the American action from the Syrian government or Russia, its principal ally.
American-led coalition forces have been operating around the al-Tanf area for months, training and advising Syrian opposition fighters who are battling the Islamic State.
The deconfliction area was created as part of an agreement between the United States and Russia to avoid military accidents.
While the United States has covertly aided some Syrian rebels fighting Mr. Assad, it has directly struck pro-government forces only twice before — in 2016 in what it called an accident, and this year in retaliation for chemical attacks it blamed on Mr. Assad’s forces.
The United States, which has long called for Mr. Assad to step down, began airstrikes against the Islamic State in Syria in 2014. The Trump administration, like the Obama administration before it, has said the main priority has been to crush the Islamic State’s self-declared caliphate that straddles Syria and Iraq.
The attack Thursday came against the backdrop of a broader geopolitical contest, as a fractious array of forces are converging on southeast Syria in the latest phase of the multisided war. Two competing coalitions that aim to defeat the Islamic State — one backed by American air power, the other by Russian warplanes — are racing to the same goal.
Islamic State fighters are expected to make their last stand in the area — around the city of Deir al-Zour, near the Iraqi and Jordanian borders — if the American-backed forces expel them from their de facto capital of Raqqa farther north.
Iranian-backed militias fighting alongside the Syrian government, including the Lebanese group Hezbollah and a number of Iraqi groups, have moved hundreds of fighters east toward Deir al-Zour in recent days. Syrian government forces have also moved toward Deir al-Zour, according to pro-government news media.
The crowded field of foreign participants in the Syrian conflict are all maneuvering for influence in and around de-escalation zones that Russia and Turkey have sought to establish. One of them is southern Syria, where the United States, Jordan and Israel are eager to prevent Iranian-backed groups, especially Hezbollah, from expanding a foothold.
As a battle for Raqqa looms, residents there have reported that more and more Islamic State leaders are relocating to the southeast along the Euphrates River toward Deir al-Zour, even taking equipment like large generators and telecommunications systems.
Their relocation has contributed to an urgency among the competing coalitions fighting the Islamic State to be the first in southeast Syria to defeat the group and to occupy the power vacuum that its defeat would leave.
Eastern Syria and the area around Deir al-Zour are mostly unpopulated desert, but they have Syria’s modest oil reserves and connects the country to Iraq.
The area is strategically important to the United States, which wants to stabilize Iraq where it has a long-term military and political investment, and to Russia, which wants to strengthen the Syrian government’s control of as much territory as possible.
And the area is critical to Iran, which wants secure corridors from its borders to the Mediterranean to reinforce its influence in Lebanon and maintain an ability to challenge Israel. All claim to be battling the Islamic State but have refused to collaborate.
Despite the Islamic State’s territorial retreat, it remains capable of deadly attacks. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group, reported Thursday that Islamic State fighters attacked the Salamiyah district of west-central Syria between the government-controlled cities of Aleppo and Homs, and that 52 people were killed, many of them civilians including at least five children. The Syrian Observatory, which is based in Britain but maintains networks of contacts in Syria, called the Islamic State attacks the worst in Salamiyah in two years.
