Israeli Fires on Palestinian Protesters in the West Bank, Killing One
JERUSALEM — An Israeli settler whose car was caught up in a pro-Palestinian street demonstration in the West Bank on Thursday opened fire on the protesters, killing a 23-year-old Palestinian man and wounding a news photographer.
The protest, held in support of Palestinian prisoners on a hunger strike that has now lasted 32 days, was one of several marred by violence recently.
At a protest near the city of Ramallah on Thursday, Israeli soldiers fired on demonstrators, wounding one Palestinian. The day before, a settler fired a gun at protesters blocking roads near Ramallah and throwing stones; a 19-year-old Palestinian was injured in that episode.
The deadly shooting on Thursday took place near the village of Hawara, about five miles south of Nablus. It set off a battle of blame.
Israelis pointed to video images showing the settler’s car, a small silver hatchback, being pounded by rocks and surrounded by dozens of demonstrators. For their part, Palestinians accused the settler of firing needlessly when the Israeli Army was already dispersing the crowd.
The dead man was identified as Muataz Hussein Hilal Bani Shamsa, 23, from the nearby village of Beita. He was shot in the head.
The Associated Press issued a statement saying that its photographer Majdi Mohammed had been shot in the hand while covering the protest. “A.P. urges a full investigation into the incident,” the news agency said in the statement.
Micky Rosenfeld, spokesman for the Israeli police, said the gunman, whom he did not identify, was a social worker from the Itamar settlement and had acted in self-defense. “He was in a critical, life-threatening situation,” Mr. Rosenfeld said, adding that the settler had gone to a police station afterward to report the episode and was not under arrest.
The United Nations official responsible for coordinating the Middle East peace process, Nickolay E. Mladenov, condemned the shooting in a post in Twitter, writing, “Those responsible must be investigated and prosecuted.”
Demonstrations in support of the hunger strikers have been growing, as have clashes between civilians and both the Israeli and Palestinian security forces. Palestinians said the shooting Thursday was another example of unwarranted use of force.
Anger has run especially high over the shooting death of a 16-year-old girl earlier this month in the Old City of Jerusalem. The Israeli Army has said that the girl threatened soldiers with a knife.
Since 2015, several dozen Israelis — some tallies put the figure at nearly 40 — have been killed by Palestinians in a wave of attacks, mostly vehicle rammings and stabbings. Over the same period, Palestinian officials say, more than 250 Palestinians have been killed by violence; Israeli officials say most of them were killed while carrying out or attempting attacks.
