Warm Start With Israel Cools as Trump Prepares Visit. What Happened?
JERUSALEM — President Trump’s visit to Jerusalem next week has spun into a difficult diplomatic test with Israel, one of the United States’ firmest allies.
Not only has Mr. Trump given Russian diplomats intelligence that officials say came from Israel, but some of his aides have also publicly questioned whether one of the holiest Jewish sites, the Western Wall, truly belongs to Israel. And an accompanying host of small diplomatic misunderstandings and missteps have begun adding up to more than their parts.
Mr. Trump is also testing Israeli politics in a way few on the right here envisioned when he became president and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told him Israel had “no greater friend.”
At the heart of it all is Mr. Trump’s quest, with the wider Arab world, for “the ultimate deal” to finally bring peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. And during Mr. Trump’s visit here, it is his friend and ally Mr. Netanyahu who is most likely to be seen as the least cooperative, given the pressure he faces from settlers in the occupied West Bank and members of his own coalition, most of them deeply opposed to the idea of a two-state solution — one for Israelis, one for Palestinians.
At the same time, the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, seen by many as hesitant, or even obstructionist, may seem to be more open to what Mr. Trump wants.
It is at once a case study in why this region is so unpredictable and a test of whether the new president is in over his head or knows something his many failed predecessors did not.
“We are close allies and share the same worldview,” Shuli Moalem-Refaeli, a member of Parliament from the Jewish Home party, said of Mr. Trump. But she urged Mr. Netanyahu, whose party is a coalition partner with hers, not to discuss two states even if Mr. Trump pushes that as a solution.
“I pray that the process with the U.S. administration will not come to any harm to our close relations,” she added. “I hope we will continue to have good relations, even if we don’t agree.”
Israeli officials are keeping silent on the intelligence breach with the Russians, so it is hard to tell whether it has hurt Mr. Trump’s position with Israel. Some experts speculate that the new tension may make Mr. Trump more likely to fulfill an Israeli dream: having the United States move its embassy to Jerusalem from Tel Aviv, tacitly supporting Israel’s claim that the divided city is its eternal capital.
But no one expects huge progress on Mr. Trump’s trip, which has already been tangled in diplomatic stumbles. In one, a scheduled trip to Masada, where Mr. Trump wanted to deliver a speech at the Roman-era mountaintop retreat that stands as a symbol of Israel’s unwillingness to surrender, was called off on Tuesday.
Feelings here were wounded when American officials declined to allow Israeli leaders, Mr. Netanyahu among them, to accompany Mr. Trump on the first visit of a sitting American president to the Western Wall. (The United States and most other nations have not recognized Israel’s annexation of East Jerusalem after the 1967 war, thus it remains, in policy, occupied land.)
All of this, mixed with a slowly building apprehension here that Mr. Trump might not, after all, be in the mood to give the Israeli right everything it wants, has left the distinct appearance that Mr. Netanyahu will be on the defensive as the president arrives. The two leaders took pains on Tuesday to reassert their working relationship in a phone call, but some chill is likely to last.
On the Palestinian side, there is little to lose in being solicitous of Mr. Trump.
Mr. Abbas’s advisers say that meetings with Mr. Trump’s team here and in Washington have been highly productive and that Mr. Abbas, 82, wishes to be the Palestinian leader who finally makes a deal. Critics note that he is highly unpopular at home and that his survival depends on maintaining power. Thus he has few options other than to restart talks if that is what Mr. Trump and regional Arab leaders want.
“What we want is a state of our own to live side by side with Israel,” said Majdi al-Khalidi, Mr. Abbas’s diplomatic adviser.
David Keyes, Mr. Netanyahu’s spokesman, said the prime minister had consistently called on Mr. Abbas to negotiate but had repeatedly been turned down. “No external pressure is required for him to begin negotiations, and no domestic pressure will prevent him from doing so,” Mr. Keyes said.
The Israeli government’s rising tension with Mr. Trump is a departure from the mood here in the days just after his election, which the Israeli right celebrated with vigor after eight tumultuous years with President Barack Obama. Mr. Trump had promised to move the American Embassy to Jerusalem, a step other nations have not taken, and he remained silent as the right announced renewed settlement building and even possible annexation in the West Bank.
There is much less fervor now. Mr. Trump decided not to move the embassy immediately, out of fear of backlash among Palestinians and the Arab world. He also publicly asked Mr. Netanyahu to exercise restraint on Jewish settlements in the West Bank, which would mean less land for a possible Palestinian homeland.
While Mr. Trump’s national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, said last week that the president intended to “reaffirm America’s unshakable bond to the Jewish state,” he also said Mr. Trump would “express his desire for dignity and self-determination for the Palestinians.” This has made many of Mr. Netanyahu’s allies nervous.
The embassy move remains an issue. Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who will be traveling with the president in Israel, has said that no final decision has been made and that the administration is still mulling “what impact such a move would have” on peace talks.
Mr. Trump has until June 1 to decide: United States law calls for such a move, but his predecessors, concerned about reaction in the Arab world, signed waivers delaying the move every six months. (Mr. Tillerson also ruffled feathers here by referring to “Palestine,” a name Israel sees, and rejects, as a recognition of a Palestinian state.)
In what the Israeli news media declared on Monday was the “first” disagreement with Mr. Trump about this visit — suggesting more to come, and they did — Mr. Netanyahu answered Mr. Tillerson by saying that moving the embassy would only advance peace “by shattering the Palestinian fantasy according to which Jerusalem isn’t the capital of Israel.”
Though Mr. Abbas has opposed such a move as a de facto recognition of Israeli sovereignty over all of Jerusalem — the Palestinians demand East Jerusalem as their future capital — he has been mostly silent on the issue these days.
Reaction in Israel to Mr. Trump’s information-sharing with Russia was uncharacteristically muted, with most outlets sticking to citing foreign news reports. It did not appear that any office-holding politician commented on it, and other analysts did so with the greatest of caution.
Among the most pressing questions, though, is whether any of the men — Mr. Trump, Mr. Abbas or Mr. Netanyahu — is capable of reaching deals that escaped the likes of Yitzhak Rabin and Bill Clinton, to name but a few.
“Most Palestinians have lost trust in Mahmoud Abbas’s ability to reach a fair and just deal,” said Fadi Quran, a young Palestinian activist and senior campaigner at Avaaz, a liberal advocacy group.
Oded Revivi, the mayor of Efrat, a Jewish settlement, who attended the inauguration of Mr. Trump and has met with his envoy here, has been one of the most prominent voices in arguing that two states is a failed enterprise. He asked, “Can any of the three deliver?”
Gilead Sher, a former Israeli negotiator under Prime Minister Ehud Barak and now a senior fellow with the Institute for National Security Studies in Tel Aviv, said an almost incalculable number of variables would have to fall in place.
Mr. Netanyahu, he said, could overhaul his government with politicians who support a deal, such as those from the Labor Party. And, he said, Mr. Trump would have to be able to get regional Arab players — Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and the United Arab Emirates — on board, as well as restart talks directly between Israelis and Palestinians.
And Mr. Trump himself?
“He’s so unpredictable you cannot know what he will do,” he said. “It’s quite odd, but he might be the man to do it.”
