U.N. General Assembly Updates  Trump Speaks Out on Globalization
President Trump, whose apocalyptic speech in his United Nations debut last year riveted much of the world’s attention, spoke again on the world’s most important diplomatic stage on Tuesday, at the organization’s New York headquarters. 
Mr. Trump has alienated allies and sidled up to adversaries, all while he pursues an America First agenda. Unlike in 2017, however, when Mr. Trump threatened to annihilate North Korea and its leader, Kim Jong-un, he touted his budding friendship with Mr. Kim — even though there has been little progress in their underlying dispute over North Korea’s nuclear weapons and missiles. 
[Read our article on why Mr. Trump’s aides feared he might be too nice at this year’s General Assembly.]
Mr. Trump boasted of what he called impressive accomplishments in the United States and around the world.
“In less than two years, my administration has accomplished more than almost any administration in the history of our country,” he said, setting off murmurs of laughter by world leaders in the cavernous hall. 
“I did not expect that reaction,” he said.
“The United States is stronger, safer and a richer country than it was when I assumed office less than two years ago,” Mr. Trump told the General Assembly, in his second address as president. “We are standing up for America and the American people. We are also standing up for the world.”
He said that under his administration the United States had started building a wall along the border with Mexico, defeated the Islamic State and eased the crisis with North Korea through dialogue with the leader of the nuclear-armed state.
“We have engaged with North Korea to replace the specter of conflict with a bold and new push for peace,” Mr. Trump said, speaking about his Singapore summit meeting with Mr. Kim.
“The missiles and rockets are no longer flying in every direction, nuclear testing has stopped,” the president said. “I would like to thank Chairman Kim for his courage and for the steps he has taken though much work remains to be done.”
Mr. Trump said that sanctions against North Korea would stay in place until denuclearization occurs, but called the moment “far greater” than people would understand.
Mr. Trump denounced Iran’s leaders, calling them a “corrupt dictatorship” responsible for “death and destruction” and said his reimposition of nuclear sanctions had severely weakened the Iranian government.
 “They do not respect their neighbors or borders or the sovereign rights of nations,” he said.
He also called for the “restoration of democracy in Venezuela,” and that he was adding economic sanctions on President Nicolás Maduro’s “inner circle” and close advisers.
In a list of complaints about globalism, which he portrayed as a threat to American sovereignty, Mr. Trump rejected the legitimacy of the International Criminal Court, echoing recent statements by top aides like John R. Bolton, his national security adviser. 
“As far as America is concerned,” Mr. Trump said, the court — which prosecutes war crimes and crimes against humanity — has “no legitimacy and no authority.”
We “reject the ideology of globalism,” he said.
He also spoke of renegotiating “bad and broken trade deals,” and said that “many nations agree that the trade system is in dire need” of change. He said the United States had “racked up $13 billion in trade deficits” in the last two decades. 
“But those days are over,” he said. “We will no longer tolerate such abuse.”
While Mr. Trump touted America’s energy independence, he assailed the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries — which includes Saudi Arabia, a strong United States ally — for rising oil prices.
OPEC nations are “ripping off the rest of the world,” he said. “I don’t like it. Nobody should like it.” 
“We want them to stop raising prices, we want them to start lowering prices,” he said in reference to the OPEC cartel. “We are not going to put up with it, these horrible prices, much longer.”
Warning against international reliance on a single supplier of energy, Mr. Trump applauded some European nations, singling out Poland, for moving to establish pipelines with the Baltics to break a dependence on Russian oil — in one of his few mentions of Russia. 
But as he has done before, he attacked Germany for what he called its energy dependence.
“Germany will become totally dependent on Russian energy if it does not immediately change course,” Mr. Trump said.
Mr. Rouhani, who has all but ruled out a meeting with Mr. Trump, offered a portrait of his country that is law-abiding, respectful and first in the fight against terrorism — diametrically opposite the description presented a few hours earlier by the American president.
Mr. Rouhani denounced the Trump administration not only for repudiating the nuclear agreement, but also for threatening through the use of sanctions to punish any country that seeks to do business with Iran.
“The economic war that the United States has initiated under the rubric of new sanctions not only targets the Iranian people, but entails harmful repercussions for people of other countries,” Mr. Rouhani said. He also made clear that he thought Mr. Trump’s offer to talk with Iran’s leaders was disingenuous at best.
“It is ironic that the United States government does not even conceal its plan for overthrowing the same government it invites to talks,” Mr. Rouhani said.
In a clear sign of irritation, the Trump administration warned the United States’ chief European partners on Tuesday of unhappiness over their move to bypass its reimposed sanctions on Iran. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and the national security adviser, John R. Bolton, told a conference in New York that the European plan to create a way for Iran to conduct international financial transactions was a big mistake. 
 “We do not intend to allow our sanctions to be evaded by Europe or anybody else,” Mr. Bolton said at the conference, which was organized by United Against Nuclear Iran, a group that has criticized the 2015 nuclear deal reached under the Obama administration. 
Mr. Pompeo said on his Twitter account that the United States, which withdrew from the agreement in May, was “disturbed & deeply disappointed to hear the remaining parties in the deal announce they are setting up a special payment system to bypass U.S. sanctions. This is one of most counterproductive measures imaginable for regional & global peace & security. “
Mr. Bolton, who has made no secret of his antipathy for Iran’s leaders, also directed some of his strongest ire at them. "If you cross us or our allies or our partners, you harm our citizens,” he said. “If you continue to lie and cheat, yes there will indeed be hell to pay." 
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, who spoke directly after President Trump addressed the assembly, took aim at some United States policies, without specifically mentioning the Trump administration.
Mr. Erdogan assailed Mr. Trump’s Iran sanctions, support for a Kurdish-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Syria and the legal protections afforded to Fethullah Gulen, the Turkish cleric-in-exile in Pennsylvania. Mr. Erdogan has described Mr. Gulen and his organization as the instigator of the failed 2016 coup in Turkey. 
“Where does the head, the mastermind of that terrorist organization reside?” Mr. Erdogan said. “In the United States of America. And from there they export terror.”
Desp
