Egypt Tried to Block Broadcast of CBS Interview With President Sisi
Egypt tried to block the broadcast of an interview by CBS News with President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi about his covert military cooperation with Israel, the network said Friday. The network refused and will broadcast the interview on Sunday.
The attempt to stop the broadcast was the latest indication of the growing tension between Egypt’s public hostility and its private collaboration with the Jewish state.
Egyptian officials and the state-owned Egyptian media continue to rail against Israel as a dangerous enemy, and as recently as 2016 the Egyptian Parliament voted overwhelmingly to expel a lawmaker for the offense of hosting a dinner with the Israeli ambassador to Cairo. (A fellow member of Parliament was so outraged he threw a shoe at the culprit.)
Outside of public view, however, Egypt’s military and intelligence agencies have worked closely with their Israeli counterparts for nearly four decades, since the Camp David treaty of 1978. That cooperation has grown far closer since the military coup that brought Mr. Sisi to power in 2013.
Reversing decades of hostility that led to several armed conflicts, Mr. Sisi has gone as far as allowing Israeli military aircraft and drones to conduct hundreds of secret airstrikes against Egyptian militants inside the Egyptian border in the Sinai Peninsula.
When The New York Times first reported that covert air campaign early last year, Mr. Sisi’s government denied it.
“It has been bizarre and hypocritical for a long time,” said Michele Dunne, director of the Middle East Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. “But under Sisi the disparity has become even sharper, with Egypt allowing the Israeli military to strike Egyptian insurgents.”
Mr. Sisi’s interview, with the CBS News program “60 Minutes,” appears to be the first time that he has publicly acknowledged or even addressed the Israeli military cooperation with Egypt.
In its statement, CBS said that an interviewer had asked Mr. Sisi if the military cooperation between Egypt and Israel was closer than ever, and he had replied, “That is correct.”
“We have a wide range of cooperation with the Israelis,” Mr. Sisi said, according to the statement.
A spokesman for CBS News said that shortly after the interview was recorded, its producers had received a phone call from the Egyptian Embassy requesting that it be withheld from broadcast. At the instructions of the ambassador, “we are formally requesting that the interview not be aired,” an Egyptian diplomat wrote in a follow-up email, according to the CBS spokesman, Kevin Tedesco.
CBS is now promoting the interview as “the interview Egypt’s government doesn’t want on TV.” The government’s specific objection was not made explicit.
The Egyptian Embassy did not respond to a request for comment.
The insurgency in the North Sinai began in 2013, when Mr. Sisi, then the defense minister, removed Egypt’s first fairly elected president, Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood.
Egyptian and Western officials have said that the militants based in the North Sinai number less than a few thousand. But the Egyptian military has struggled for five years without success to crush them. Since 2015 the militants have declared themselves an arm of the Islamic State.
American officials have said that the covert Israeli air campaign began around the same time and has played a pivotal role in helping the Egyptian Army regain the upper hand against the insurgents.
Mr. Sisi, in the same interview, also made inaccurate assertions in an effort to justify the massacre by Egyptian security forces of nearly 1,000 people in August 2013 at a sit-in protesting his military takeover.
“There were thousands of armed people in the sit-in for more than 40 days,” Mr. Sisi said, according to the CBS statement. “We tried every peaceful means to disperse them.”
In fact, Egyptian officials have acknowledged that they recovered only a handful of weapons from the sit-in, and human rights groups who have studied the massacre have affirmed the conclusion of journalists present that very few demonstrators were armed.
