Pompeo Plans to Press Saudi Leaders Over Killing of Jamal Khashoggi
WASHINGTON — Secretary of State Mike Pompeo will press Saudi Arabia’s leaders this month on diplomatic conclusions that the kingdom has failed to sufficiently answer for the October killing of the dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi, a senior American official said on Friday.
Turkish officials have said Mr. Khashoggi, a Washington Post columnist who lived in Virginia, was beaten and dismembered when he visited the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul to get documents for his wedding. After his death, Saudi Arabia removed a few senior officials from their posts, and on Thursday a Saudi court held the first session in the trial of 11 suspects charged with Mr. Khashoggi’s death.
The American official spoke as part of a briefing organized for journalists by the State Department to preview Mr. Pompeo’s visits to eight Arab nations in the Middle East from Jan. 8 to Jan. 15. Four senior officials spoke on the call on the condition of anonymity, which the State Department demands for such briefings.
Separately, the department announced that a senior diplomat, James F. Jeffrey, is the new special envoy coordinating efforts to fight the Islamic State. Mr. Jeffrey will also continue as a special representative on Syria. The previous envoy, Brett McGurk, resigned last month after President Trump announced he was withdrawing all 2,000 American troops from Syria. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis had resigned in protest two days earlier.
The officials at Friday’s briefing said that a main theme of Mr. Pompeo’s trip would be to discuss strategies to contain Iran, a Persian and predominantly Shiite state that is seen as a nemesis not only by most of the region’s predominantly Sunni Arab nations, but also by Israel and the Trump administration.
In recent months, Mr. Pompeo and John R. Bolton, the White House national security adviser, have stressed ways in which the United States is pushing back against what they call Iranian aggression. They include imposing strict economic sanctions after Mr. Trump’s withdrawal from a nuclear arms agreement that world powers reached with Iran in 2015.
But the case of Mr. Khashoggi, and growing opposition among American politicians to the Saudi-led bombing campaign in Yemen and the humanitarian crisis it created, underscore the complexities of Mr. Pompeo’s trip — and of the administration’s focus on containing Iran.
Mr. Trump has come under intense criticism for failing to hold Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia accountable for Mr. Khashoggi’s death.
On Friday, the officials said the State Department had concluded that Saudi leaders had neither taken sufficient responsibility for Mr. Khashoggi’s death nor given a convincing account of what happened inside the consulate. Earlier, a C.I.A. assessment found that Prince Mohammed, the main power in Saudi Arabia, was responsible for the killing in Istanbul through his close ties to the hit team that carried it out.
In a remarkable announcement in November, Mr. Trump said the United States was maintaining its warm relationship with Saudi Arabia, even if the crown prince may have “had knowledge of this tragic event.”
Mr. Trump has not spoken out about the Saudi-led coalition’s war against the Houthis in Yemen. Last month, in a rare move that amounted to a strong rebuke to the president, the Republican-led Senate voted 56 to 41 to end United States aid to the coalition. The Senate also passed a separate resolution blaming Prince Mohammed for Mr. Khashoggi’s death.
Inside the White House, Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and main Middle East adviser, has developed close ties to Prince Mohammed and has urged Mr. Trump to continue the relationship with Riyadh. And at the State Department, Mr. Pompeo has voiced his support for Mr. Trump’s approach.
Mr. Pompeo made an emergency visit to Riyadh after news of the Oct. 2 killing of Mr. Khashoggi, and photographs of him smiling in a meeting with Prince Mohammed fueled widespread criticism of his trip.
During Friday’s briefing, the State Department officials did not directly address Prince Mohammed’s culpability in the death of Mr. Khashoggi when asked. One official did say, however, that the removal of senior Saudi officials from posts did not amount to holding them responsible for the killing.
One of those Saudi officials was Saud al-Qahtani, a close ally of the crown prince who was removed from his post as the kingdom’s social media czar after Mr. Khashoggi was killed. Mr. Qahtani was not among those arrested in October in Saudi Arabia after the death became a diplomatic crisis.
The State Department official said Mr. Pompeo also planned to speak with Saudi officials about last month’s peace talks in Sweden that aimed to end the Yemen war. And he is expected to discuss the Saudi-led blockade of Qatar, where the United States has a military base.
On Friday, a representative of the top United Nations human rights office told reporters in Geneva that the trial of the 11 suspects in Saudi Arabia was “not sufficient.” The representative, Ravina Shamdasani, also said the United Nations office objected to the Saudi prosecutors seeking the death penalty for five of the 11 suspects.
