Discussing North Korea
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
It’s arguably the biggest story in the Asia Pacific region: the standoff over North Korea and its weapons program.
To put the latest developments in context, I called Choe Sang-Hun, The New York Times’s correspondent in Seoul, South Korea. He’s been covering the Korean Peninsula for us since 2005, and on any given week, he writes a handful of news articles and analytical features, along with the occasional personal reflection.
Our discussion covered a lot of ground. I asked him about North Korea’s latest provocation, when it fired a missile over Japan; I asked about where Australia ranks in terms of North Korea’s priorities; and of course, we discussed President Trump and how he is viewed in the region.
You can watch the video or read a lightly edited version of our chat for all the details, but here’s an excerpt that stuck with me:
If you’re looking for more coverage of North Korea and the rest of Asia, you can always visit our Asia page.
I’d also encourage you to check out The Times on Snapchat, where some of our North Korea coverage is proving to be especially well read by younger readers in Australia, the U.S. and Canada.
Below (as usual) you’ll find some other reports in The Times that piqued my interest this week, plus some music recommendations from my Australian colleagues.
As always, share this newsletter if you enjoy it, tell us what you think at nytaustralia@nytimes.com, and if you’re a subscriber, join us in our private Facebook group for even more conversation.
You should sign up for the Australia edition of our Morning Briefing too!
_______
Overwhelmed by the news from Texas and Louisiana since the storm once known as Hurricane Harvey made landfall? Here’s an overview of The Times’s latest coverage. It’s one of several guides we’ve started producing to help readers manage the full scope of our coverage of big news events.
______
Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook, had breakfast with our DealBook columnist, Andrew Ross Sorkin — not to talk about technology, but about democracy and responsibility. “The reality is that government, for a long period of time, has for whatever set of reasons become less functional, and isn’t working at the speed that it once was,” he told Andrew. “And so it does fall, I think, not just on business but on all other areas of society to step up.”
______
Is professional tennis becoming like basketball, where only the super tall can survive and thrive? Maybe. Just ask Martina Hingis. Or any of the men on tour who are not quite gigantic. While we’re at it, don’t forget to follow live updates on the U.S. Open from our talented tennis writers.
______
Check out this profile of Gabriel Tallent,whose “My Absolute Darling” is shaping up to be one of the most anticipated debut novels of the year. The piece cites a rare ringing endorsement from Stephen King: “When I read it the first thing I thought was, I couldn’t do this, and I’ve been doing it for 40 years.”
______
As I’ve been traveling a lot recently, I’ve been diving into music again with input from my savvy Australian colleagues. Two Australian artists are worming their way into my ears:
Methyl Ethel. This was part of the playlist that Brook Mitchell, a Sydney photographer, played as we drove to meet Clinton Pryor in southern New South Wales. There’s a melancholy energy to it that seemed to work well for a pre-dawn drive.
Jen Cloher. Tacey Rychter, our audience growth editor (who just got engaged to Will Cuming a.k.a., LANKS, a Melbourne musician who layers ethereal vocals over electronica) suggested this one. Jen is Courtney Barnett’s partner and her new album reminded me a bit of Lou Reed, but updated, and Aussie.
What else should I be listening to? Send your new musical favorites (Australian or not) to nytaustralia@nytimes.com with a sentence about why you love them, and I’ll include a few selections in my next newsletter.
One more thing: Here’s our monthly guide to Netflix Australia. I’m still catching up with “Game of Thrones” so no new shows for me!
