YouTube has banned a 14-year-old girl for violating anti-hate speech with nasty homophobic video
   YouTube has cracked down on hate. 
   A teenager with a long history of hate speech on YouTube has been banned by the streaming platform. 
   The 14-year-old YouTuber, who goes by Soph, is a rising star in ultra-conservative circles. She uses blatant displays of hate speech — disguised as a dry form of far-right humor — as her comedy material. 
   She was kicked off the platform Thursday, after posting a video calling LGBTQ people pedophiles. In the 12-minute-long rant entitled “Pride & Prejudice,” Soph referred to Pride month as “30 days of AIDS-carrying pedophile victims patting themselves on the back for their lifestyles,” according to the Advocate. 
   “I had an especially hard time considering that I live in California where there was a puddle of diseased load waiting for me whenever I dared to step out of my house,” she added. 
   Soph also told her followers to “make sure to blame me in your manifestos,” a word that can be understood as a reference to the documents referred by the mass shooter in Chirstchurch, who killed 51 people in New Zealand in March. 
   The suspect of the shooting in El Paso shooting Saturday allegedly published a white supremacist manifesto to 8chan, before killing 22 people. 
   Even though the video by itself wouldn’t be enough to kick somebody off the platform, it was the third time in three weeks that she violated company’s policies. 
   When users infringe YouTube’s three-strike rule, they are permanently removed from the platform. 
   Not a stranger to controversies, Soph gained a following of nearly 1 million people in the streaming platform for anti-Muslim videos she posted in the platform earlier in the year. 
   In May, the foul-mouthed high school student from California made national headlines for a video where she can be seen wearing a hijab and making derogatory comments towards Muslims. 
   The video prompted a protest in her Marin County high school, according to Bay Area news site Kron4, as well as at least two police investigations. 
   When YouTube threatened to disable comments on her account, she wasn’t pleased and threatened to kill YouTube’s CEO Susan Wojcicki. 
   “Susan, I’ve known your address since last summer," Soph said. “I’ve got a Luger and a mitochondrial disease. I don’t care if I live. Why should I care if you live or your children? I just called an Uber. You’ve got about seven minutes to draft up a will,” she said. “I’m coming for you, and it ain’t gonna be pretty.” 
   Police determined that the threat wasn’t credible because she doesn’t own any firearms. 
   After Soph was finally kicked off the platform, she tweeted an image of herself with what appears to be an assault rifle, according to BuzzFeed News. The caption read “youtube headquarters here I come.” 
   She later removed the tweet, saying that you probably just got it all wrong. 
   “Gun tweet obviosly a joke,” she later wrote in a followup tweet.   
