NCAA creates Rich Paul Rule to block players from going to LeBron’s agent
   Since 2018, college basketball players considering entering the NBA draft have been able to hire an agent but preserve their NCAA eligibility if they ultimately decide to stay in college. The first edition of the rule said that all family members and NBA Players’ Association-certified agents were allowable agents until Aug. 1, 2020. The regulations for 2020 are here, and they seem specifically crafted to target Rich Paul and crack down on family members. 
   Two of them are reasonable enough, even if they’re needlessly tighter than what the NBPA requires: NBPA certification for three years and an in-person written exam. The third is to get Paul out of the paint by requiring a bachelor’s degree, which Paul doesn’t have because he started working with LeBron James before he graduated from college. (The NCAA will take literally any bachelor’s degree in anything, really driving home the point that this isn’t about technical qualifications but gatekeeping.) 
   James has spent the last day retweeting players and writers defending his longtime agent, and added a few critiques of his own: 
   Keeping Paul locked out while letting other agencies in seems ridiculous in a perfectly NCAA way, but there are a few reasons why colleges would do this. The first is needlessly flexing muscle against Paul and players’ family members, saying that they might be good enough for the NBA, but college is serious. The second is that Paul specifically has shown an ability in the NBA to genuinely undermine power structures and return some power to his clients; nowhere in the world is more ripe for that type of revolution than the NCAA. 
   The third is the most obvious: Paul client Darius Bazley skipped college basketball entirely to be a million-dollar intern for New Balance. Other players repped by other agents have done this: Knicks center Mitchell Robinson skipped the NCAA to simply work out, and blue-chipper RJ Hampton is playing in New Zealand instead of the ACC this season. But Bazley took on the least risk, and created maybe the most appealing alternative path. The NCAA can’t live with that.   
