Controversial messaging board 8chan, linked to El Paso gunman, goes offline after security company pulls support
   The long-criticized message board 8chan, which has frequently been used by extremists including the gunman in Saturday’s mass shooting in El Paso, went dark just after midnight Monday after its security firm cut off support to the “cesspool of hate.” 
   Matthew Prince, the CEO of Cloudfare, announced Sunday that his website security company was dropping support to 8chan, which would open the website up to cyberattacks. 
   “The rationale is simple: they have proven themselves to be lawless and that lawlessness has caused multiple tragic deaths,” Prince wrote in a blog post. “Even if 8chan may not have violated the letter of the law in refusing to moderate their hate-filled community, they have created an environment that revels in violating its spirit.” 
   Prince’s announcement came after a manifesto linked to the El Paso shooter appeared on 8chan just minutes before the mass shooting that left 22 dead and dozens injured. 
   Law enforcement officials have not confirmed that the manifesto was posted by 21-year-old Patrick Crusius, but said they believe he penned the scribe. The four-page hate-filled document blasted immigrants and Hispanics. 
   “Unfortunately, this is not an isolated incident. Nearly the same thing happened on 8chan before the terror attack in Christchurch, New Zealand,” Prince wrote. 
   “The El Paso shooter specifically referenced the Christchurch incident and appears to have been inspired by the largely unmoderated discussions on 8chan which glorified the previous massacre. In a separate tragedy, the suspected killer in the Poway, Calif., synagogue shooting also posted a hate-filled ‘open letter’ on 8chan. 8chan has repeatedly proven itself to be a cesspool of hate.” 
   On its official Twitter account, 8chan warned that there would be “some downtime in the next 24-48 hours while we find a solution.” 
   Another domain host, Epik, picked up 8chan, according to online records, but Epik’s web services Voxility, quickly banned the site. 
   “As soon as we were notified of the content that Epik was hosting, we made the decision to totally ban them,” Voxility business development VP Maria Sirbu told The Verge. 
   Epik also hosts Gab, the social media site used by Pittsburgh synagogue shooter Robert Bowers, after it was dropped by GoDaddy. At the time, Epik defended the decision by calling the de-platforming of the controversial site “digital censorship.” 
   8chan founder Frederick Brennan, who resigned in 2016, even called for the site to be shut down Sunday. 
   “It’s not doing the world any good," he told the New York Times. "It’s a complete negative to everybody except the users that are there. And you know what? It’s a negative to them, too. They just don’t realize it.” 
   Cloudfare also stopped doing business with The Daily Stormer, a Neo-Nazi website, in 2017, but the site continues after picking up support from another company, the Seattle-based Bitmitigate. 
   Bitmitigate did not immediately return a request for comment.   
