U.N. Plans Reforms to Stamp Out Sexual Abuse by Peacekeepers
UNITED NATIONS — Faced with persistent allegations of sexual abuse by United Nations peacekeepers, the new head of the world body is proposing to stop paying countries that fail to investigate claims against their soldiers “in a timely manner,” and to put that money instead into a trust fund to assist survivors.
In what he calls “a new approach,” the secretary general, António Guterres, also wants all United Nations personnel to attest, in writing, that they understand the policy against sexual exploitation and abuse, which includes paying for sex. In addition, he intends to develop a new set of rules to prevent sexual abuse by peacekeepers — possibly including “prohibitions on the consumption of alcohol.”
The proposals, contained in a draft report obtained by The New York Times, are scheduled to be publicly released Thursday.
Allegations of sexual abuse, including against children and other vulnerable civilians in some of the world’s most troubled spots, have long dogged the world body, and have come under increased scrutiny over the last few years.
Both Mr. Guterres and his predecessor, Ban Ki-moon, vowed to tackle the problem, and last year the United Nations began to identify countries whose troops were accused. In 2015, Mr. Ban fired the head of a peacekeeping mission in Central African Republic, where some of the most serious allegations had emerged.
But those efforts have done little to stamp out the problem. In 2016, the number of accusations against military and civilian personnel increased from previous years, affecting 311 “known victims,” according to the report.
And, despite stepped-up reporting of abuse cases, the numbers still may not reflect a complete toll of victims. “We feel certain that not all cases are reported,” the report warns.
About half the victims last year were children, according to a new public database created by the United Nations. The largest number of allegations are against peacekeeping troops from the Democratic Republic of Congo, a country whose own conflict has been marked by astonishingly high rates of rape.
Several survivors have filed paternity claims against United Nations personnel.
In cases of soldiers who are accused, the United Nations itself cannot investigate the allegations. That is up to the peacekeepers’ home countries, which vary widely in their willingness to hold their troops accountable, and to inform the world body of the results of any inquiry.
Mr. Guterres, who took over as the secretary general in January, is under pressure to deliver results. Not only has sexual abuse by peacekeepers tarnished the reputation of the organization as a whole, it has also drawn the scrutiny of lawmakers in the United States, the country that pays for more than a quarter of the body’s peacekeeping budget.
The report proposes the creation of a new assistant secretary general-level position to serve as a victims’ advocate at United Nations headquarters “to ensure that every victim receives appropriate care, follow-up attention, and information on the progress of his or her case.”
Mr. Guterres said he also plans to appoint victims’ advocates in the four peacekeeping missions where the highest number of allegations have been reported: Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, Haiti and South Sudan.
Among the report’s recommendations are a new set of rules with the aim of preventing sexual exploitation and abuse. “The protocol could also include prohibitions on the consumption of alcohol,” the report states, “and a requirement for individual written attestations to confirm that the individual understands the values and principles of the United Nations.”
Some of the proposals are notable in that they are not already in place. The report says the United Nations would more carefully screen job candidates to ascertain whether there are outstanding allegations against them in another part of the organization’s system.
And all staff members would be required to acknowledge in writing every year “that they are aware of our standards, that they personally commit to them, and that they understand fully the consequences of failing to do so.”
Some of the most contentious proposals — such as withholding reimbursements to countries for their peacekeepers — would need to be approved by the General Assembly, and many countries are likely to push back.
A trust fund has been set up to assist survivors. So far, only $436,000 has been contributed from five countries: Bhutan, Cyprus, India, Japan and Norway.
