Readers sound off on NYPD, Stormy Daniels and deer
   Brooklyn: NYPD Deputy Chief Michael Osgood is an honorable and compassionate man ("NYPD is ripped on rape probes," March 28). I had the pleasure of working with him. Osgood implemented many proactive reforms at the Special Victims Division. He started the "Nightwatch" and the Cold Case Unit. He instructed all squad commanders to meet regularly with victim advocates, nurses and sex crime prosecutors. 
   He tried to improve some of the facilities. In 2012, an architect came to the offices but to date no work was done on a building that is over 100 years old. But the biggest challenge was staffing. 
   When the NYPD's Office of Management and Policy conducted its 2011 review of the Special Victims caseload, it vastly underestimated the increase. The increase came from adult squads receiving sex crime misdemeanors. In Brooklyn, the caseload went from 800 per year to over 1,300 in 2012. The Department of Investigation report accurately addresses the understaffing issues as well as recommendations which were not fully implemented. 
   NYPD Lt. Russell Burghard (ret.) 
   Scranton, Pa.: To the tune of the Eagles' classic "Lyin' Eyes," here's my tribute to House Speaker Paul Ryan, who announced Wednesday that he will not run for reelection: "There will be no more Ryan lies/ He jumped from the SS Trump before it would capsize./ The BS from his House seat they must now sanitize/ Hallelujah. There ain't going to be no more Ryan lies." Vin Morabito 
   Brooklyn: Spineless Speaker of the House Paul Ryan is the latest rat to slink off the U.S.S.R. Trump. The moron in chief is destroying the Republican Party because they don't have the guts to say, "Enough, you idiot." Ken Ackermann 
   Brooklyn: Correct me if I am wrong, but if the Romney-Ryan ticket had won the 2012 presidential election, and then reelection four years later, Paul Ryan would be in Washington, D.C., until January 2021. Maybe longer if he ran for office after Romney's tenure. Or would he have left sooner? His clichéd motive of "staying home with my family" seems suspect. David DiBello 
   Manhattan: Voicer Rabbi Yashafat Drake rightly bemoans the hatred exhibited by "good, loving Christians" who espouse racial supremacy. Has he ever given a moment's thought to the hatreds espoused and manifested by Menachem Begin, Ariel Sharon, Yitzhak Shamir, Bibi Netanyahu and Avigdor Lieberman, to name but a few? People who live in glass houses are frequently advised not to throw stones — especially when those glass houses are built in illegal West Bank settlements. Steven Sica 
   New Hyde Park, L.I.: To Voicer Harry Aydinian: May I remind you re the statement "Guns don't kill people, people kill people," which you call "total garbage": The trigger was pulled by a person. The gun did not fire by itself! The Las Vegas killer may not have been able to harm as many with a knife, but he could have done substantial harm. Any way you look at it, what happened in Las Vegas was a horrible tragedy and my thoughts and prayers are with all the families there. Michael Castellano 
   Woodside: Last weekend, the MTA posted signs along Roosevelt Ave. in Queens stating "no parking" from Friday 8 p.m. through Sunday 8 p.m. Workers never showed up on Friday or Saturday. On Sunday, workers showed up to park their cars along the blocked-off zone, because apparently mass transit is not good enough for them. This week along the same stretch of Roosevelt Ave., they posted no-parking signs for Wednesday and Thursday. At least there were workers there Thursday, but I took a picture of two sleeping and struggling with the crossword. I believe that guy was stuck on the four-letter word for what the MTA is doing to small business, starting with an F. This has been going on for years. Council member Jimmy Van Bramer held a press conference on the topic in January. MTA community relations has promised action. Nothing has been done. Dan Connor 
   Jamaica: "Doubting Thomas" (editorial, April 10), regarding students looking to remove the statue of Thomas Jefferson at Hofstra University, suggests that those students "have lost all perspective." I treat statues as symbols for the symbol-minded, not of much importance one way or the other in the scheme of things. But Pauline Maier was a historian with a perspective worthy of consideration: Maier, author of "American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence," called Jefferson "the most overrated person in American history." The plantation mentality is alive and well thanks to Jefferson's legacy. Perhaps those students know something — objective history — the Daily News does not. Roy Fox 
   East Elmhurst: Dear President Trump: For the sake of your own health and for the health of this country, please resign. You are tearing this nation apart. There are better ways to further your brand, ways that don't cost the rest of us. Melanie N. Lee 
   Orleans, Mass.: I care about the amount of taxes that I have to pay and how the piggish politicians spend it. I do not care about Stormy Daniels, a pornographic nymphomaniac. I care about the moral degradation that many in our society exhibit, especially those in Hollywood, Congress, and the news media. I do not care about Stormy Daniels. I care about whether I will be able to afford health care. I do not care about Stormy Daniels. I care about the quality of the water my family and I drink. I do not care about Stormy Daniels. I care about the polluted air my family and I breathe. I do not care about Stormy Daniels. I care about the disgusting garbage that is tossed by the disgusting piggish people of Cape Cod, consequently polluting our water, land and roads. I do not care about Stormy Daniels. I care about illegal immigrants, aka invaders, destroying the fabric of my country. I do not care about Stormy Daniels. I care about the criminal element that roams the streets of America endangering citizens. I care about and support my fabulous President, Donald J. Trump, 100%! Peter Gryzmolowicz 
   Hamilton, Ont.: I thank you, President Trump, for firing James Comey. This man offended 40 million Polish people when he attacked us in 2015 as accomplices to the Holocaust. Comey needs to learn true history and facts first before opening his mouth. It is hard to understand why he was appointed FBI director. He can attack the President all he wants, but it will not undermine Mr. Trump. Wieslawa Derlatka 
   Nelson, New Zealand: Like many other people around the globe, I feel very alarmed by the current news reports of dramas surrounding President Trump. But we hear virtually nothing about or from Vice President Mike Pence. Where is he? What has he been doing? More importantly, what are his views and comments regarding the current issues swirling around Trump and the White House both domestically and internationally? It seems it should be very important for people, in the U.S. especially and especially at this point in time, to know the views and opinions of the person standing in the wings ready to assume the presidency if needed. Instead he is like a ghost, rarely mentioned or quoted in news reports. I for one would like him to be accountable to the public who voted for him and for those who did not. He may become a much more important figure in the future. Carol Isabel Anderson 
   Morganville, N.J.: Re: "Bambi-no, deer!" (April 12): Staten Island, like every other place, has it wrong. We have a human problem, not a deer problem. Human overpopulation is at the heart of every struggle we face: congestion, disease, environmental destruction, war, poverty, overdevelopment, etc. According to Population Matters, it took until the early 1800s for the human population to reach 1 billion. Now we add a billion humans every 12 to 15 years. It's time we stop infringing on the lives of others and address the central issue — our own overpopulation and speciesism. Bethany Cortale 
   Brooklyn: To Voicer Jean Hayes: And you know that hell exists for a fact how? You've been there and came back to share your knowledge. Thanks for sharing. Victor D'Aquino   
