Gender and #MeToo in Australia  Where Do We Begin?
Want the Australia Letter by email? Sign up and forward to your friends for insight and discussion about Australia and the world. 
______
Whenever we ask Australia Letter readers for feedback on big, complicated issues — from China to race to gender — thoughtful responses pour in, making our entire bureau more informed about the country we cover.
This back and forth is vital. It’s what journalism in a networked world can and should look like.
And so before I share your input on #MeToo and gender in Australia — based on questions last week from Francesca Donner, director of the New York Times Gender Initiative — I wanted to again just say thank you to everyone who has written in, this time and in the past.
Also, just to explain how I pick which emails to include in these roundups — I generally look for trends in the feedback, ideas or thoughts contributed by more than one reader.
In this case, many of you wrote about how “gendered” Australia is, splitting off men and women from a young age, which is why I’ve included more than one comment about that.
I also look for a mix of perspectives and backgrounds, and I try to mix up the tone in a way that reflects the mood and range of reader feedback.
Sometimes I lightly edit for space or clarity; there’s never enough room for everyone’s comments (sorry about that). But generally, my goal is to give you back a curated and interesting version of what you, as a group, gave us.
Think of it as a thoughtful conversation in your inbox — because that’s what this newsletter aims to be.
With that in mind, please bring your friends and loved ones into that conversation. Forward this newsletter, share the sign-up page and tell people why you think it’s worth joining our little email community.
The more this Letter grows, the more the conversation will deepen.
Now for your answers to our questions about #MeToo in Australia, gender and where it’s heading next, followed by stories of the week, and a call from our food critic for restaurant recommendations in Perth.
— Pip Nagy
— Jill Masters
— Raphaella Kathryn Crosby
— Paul McFadyen
— Ann Bisognano
______
Federal investigators in the United States raided the office of President Trump’s personal lawyer this week. You probably already knew that.
But this piece explains why the raid matters — and what it says about what prosecutors already know and think they can prove.
It’s the best bit of explanatory context you’ll find anywhere.
______
I’m watching “The Crown” at the moment, so maybe I’m a bit biased, but I love how the Styles desk found a way to completely geek out on royal wedding details.
If this doesn’t answer every question you have about the Meghan-Harry nuptials, well, that’s on you. They came up with 60 questions and answers!
______
Facebook, Facebook, Facebook. Tsk, tsk, tsk. Beyond the scolding, there are three pieces you should read for a deeper understanding of what this all means and where it could be heading.
• Jonathan Zittrain, a professor of international law and of computer science at Harvard, explores the regulatory and legal fixes that could be on the way.
• John Hermann, one of our tech reporters, looks at the data boom that defined the past few years, and the bust that may be coming.
• Noam Cohen, a regular New York Times contributor, asks if Facebook can develop a conscience, and concludes that Mark Zuckerberg’s testimony before Congress suggests it cannot.
______
• In a Proudly Diverse Australia, White People Still Run Almost Everything: Just 5 percent of the country’s top leaders in business, government and academia have non-European backgrounds, a comprehensive study found.
• Elon Musk Likes It Here. Will Other Tech Innovators Follow? The Australian rust belt city of Adelaide wants to replicate the same innovation model that has revived American cities like Chattanooga and Pittsburgh.
• Keith Murdoch, Rugby Bruiser Who Vanished in the Outback, Is Dead at 74: While on tour, he was sent home to New Zealand over a hotel fracas. But he “went bush” instead, disappearing into remotest Australia and into legend.
• For the Birds: A Sydneysider rediscovers her wild home through the eyes and ears of a New Yorker.
• Australia Shudders Amid Talk of a Chinese Military Base in Its Backyard: A report that China approached Vanuatu about establishing a military presence in the island nation has raised alarm bells in the region.
• Australia Shocked by Death of 2,400 Sheep on Ship to Qatar: Many critics of Australia’s live animal trade said the deaths were not likely to result in regulation of the industry.
• Australia’s Prime Minister Just Can’t Win an Opinion Poll: A respected poll has found for the 30th straight time that Malcolm Turnbull’s governing Liberal party is less popular than the opposition.
• Russell Crowe Holds a ‘Divorce’ Auction (‘Gladiator’ Stuff Included): There were life-size prop horses and a trove of guitars, paintings and jewelry among the 227 lots put up for sale at Sotheby’s Australia on Saturday.
• Facebook Removes Popular Black Lives Matter Page for Being a Fake: The page, which had 700,000 followers, was run by a white man in Australia and raised at least $100,000.
• Review: 1920s Australia Is No ‘Sweet Country’ for Aboriginal Australians: The movie tracks the fate of an Aboriginal stockman forced to flee after killing a white farmer in self-defense.
______
Besha Rodell, our Australia Fare food critic, wants to know where to eat in Perth!
Here’s a message from Besha:
I’m heading to Perth in the upcoming weeks to seek out fodder for our restaurant review column, Australia Fare. As always, I’m looking for restaurants and food that tells a story about the area, the community, the history of the city, or an aspect of Australian life that is fascinating and underexplored. I know what’s on all the “top 10 restaurants in Perth” lists, but what is unique in the city? What tells a story? I’d love to hear your thoughts.
Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com with suggestions and “Australia Fare” in the subject line.
