   The daughter of a former Russian spy poisoned along with him in Britain has survived the attack and been released from the hospital. 
   Yulia Skripal, 33, was found collapsed next to her father Sergei Skripal, a 66-year-old former intelligence officer, on a bench in Salisbury last month, setting off international tumult with claims that the Kremlin was behind their attempted murder. 
   Investigations found that they had been poisoned at their home with the nerve agent Novichok, and British officials accused Russia of attacking the man who it had once sentenced to prison for treason after he sold secrets to the U.K. 
   The poisoning, which Moscow denies any part in, had eerie similarities to the death of Alexander Litvinenko, the former Russian spy killed in London in 2006, but both Skripal and his daughter have survived. 
   The younger victim was discharged from the Salisbury District Hospital on Monday but will continue receiving treatment, according to hospital officials, who said that her father is "recovering more slowly." 
   It was not immediately clear where Yulia Skripal, who lived in Russia and was visiting her father, would go after her release, though the BBC said she was taken to a "secure location." 
   A statement from her released through police last week suggested that she was cooperating with British authorities, who have said that she also declined offers of consular assistance from her home country. 
   The Russian Embassy in London continued its attacks on British officials Tuesday, and said that the "secret resettlement" of the Skripals "will be seen as an abduction or at least as their forced isolation." 
   It reacted with particular pique to reports that the father and daughter could be settled in the one of the "Five Eyes" intelligence-sharing countries, which include Britain, the U.S., Australia, Canada and New Zealand, and said that such a move would breach international law. 
   Her cousin told a Russian talk show that Yulia Skripal would apply for political asylum in the U.K., according to RIA Novosti. 
   Moscow has railed against British officials' assertion that it was behind the poisoning, as well as the fact that the U.K. has denied it access to the investigation by claiming it would be "perverse" to give the alleged perpetrator of an attack time with the victim. 
   Results from tests done by the United Nations-backed Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on the nerve agent sample are expected this week.   
