Social Media Posts Reveal NATO Soldiers’ Activities, Report Says
LONDON — “Want to see more of Lasse L. Matberg?” NATO asked on Facebook last October about an officer who acted as the public face for a recent military exercise. The following week, it said, he was to take part in Trident Juncture 2018, NATO’s “biggest exercise in decades.”
Mr. Matberg’s image, sometimes seen with Norway’s Armed Forces, has appeared prominently on his Instagram account, which has 630,000 followers. He and other NATO soldiers have also been active on Facebook, with 5,000 photos published under the hashtag #Tridentjuncture, showing soldiers posing with guns, in the field or in the cockpit of a military aircraft.
Publicizing exercises like Trident Juncture has become an essential tool for NATO to get its message out and to showcase its military strength — especially in the face of fake news spread online by Russia. But such information published on social media platforms carries risks, researchers from the Strategic Communications Center of Excellence warned this week.
An article published by the independent organization, which provides NATO with advice and expertise and is based in Riga, Latvia, said that during another recent exercise (not Trident Juncture) in a NATO nation, researchers were able to collect sensitive information, track troop movements and find soldiers’ approximate location via social media.
It’s the latest warning that in addition to electronic devices such as smartphones, Instagram and Facebook also can unintentionally pull back the curtain on military activities meant to be kept out of the public eye. In January 2018, Strava, a fitness app that posts a map of its users’ activity, unwittingly revealed the locations and habits of military bases and personnel, including those of American forces in Iraq and Syria.
And on Tuesday, Russian lawmakers voted to bar troops from using smartphones and recording devices, and from posting anything online about their military service, after soldiers’ digital traces were used to reveal actions the Kremlin wanted to keep secret.
Here’s what the researchers from the Strategic Communications Center of Excellence found.
The researchers embedded with a unit that played the adversary in an exercise by a NATO member state. They discovered that Instagram provided timely information about the exercise, and Facebook features like friend suggestions allowed them to find soldiers through their connections.
They not only used data that people shared publicly on social media to connect with soldiers. They also set up “honey pot” pages designed to lure the soldiers in and closed groups on Facebook, using both fake accounts and some that impersonated real people to engage with their targets. They sought details about the exercise, its participants and its targets.
The results were in line with a recent article by Bellingcat, an online investigative group that recently gained prominence when it identified the Russian spies suspected by Britain of poisoning the former Russian spy Sergei V. Skripal, and his daughter, Yulia, in Salisbury, England.
