Threatening U.S., Putin Promises Russians Both Missiles and Butter
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia — facing an economically beleaguered, less-supportive public — used his annual state-of-the-nation speech on Wednesday to promise a raft of social spending, while also doubling down on threats against the United States.
Mr. Putin said Washington was fueling a new arms race by withdrawing from a landmark nuclear weapons treaty and possibly deploying new missiles in Europe. Without mentioning any country in particular, he warned that if American missiles were deployed on the continent, within a few minutes’ flight of his country, Russia would aim its weapons at those missiles and at targets in the United States.
“Russia will be forced to create and deploy new types of weapons that could be used not only against the territories where a direct threat to us comes from, but also against the territories where decision-making centers directing the use of missile systems threatening us are located,” he said. “The capability of such weapons, including the time to reach those centers, will be equivalent to the threats against Russia.”
Russian missiles, including nuclear weapons, targeting the United States is not new. Nor is saber rattling by Mr. Putin, who devoted much of his speech last year to what he claimed were highly advanced new weapons.
But on Wednesday, amid a steady deterioration in relations with Washington, he made some of his most explicit threats ever. They followed the announcement this month that President Trump was withdrawing the United States from the landmark 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, after years of accusations — rejected by Moscow — that Russia had violated the pact.
Russia will develop and deploy whatever weapons systems are needed to remain secure, Mr. Putin said, though, as he is well aware, a costly arms race in the 1980s, combined with sinking oil prices, contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union. His aggressive tone appeared to be intended, in part, to persuade Washington not to abandon the treaty.
“Among the ruling class” in the United States, he said, are many people who “are too captivated by ideas of their exceptionalism and their superiority over the entire rest of the world.”
“But do they know how to count?” he asked. “Surely they do. Let them first calculate the range and speed of our advanced weapons systems, and then make decisions on the threats against our country.”
Mr. Putin did not criticize President Trump, instead suggesting, as he has in the past, that a secretive “deep state” hobbled the American president.
In his speech last year Mr. Putin cataloged an array of new weapons that he said Russia was developing, while animations showed missiles striking the United States. This year he mentioned just a few.
This spring, he said, Russia will launch its first nuclear submarine carrying a Poseidon, an unmanned underwater nuclear drone, and will deploy a new Zircon hypersonic missile for the Russian Navy. The missile can fly at nine times the speed of sound with a range of 620 miles, he said.
