A Global Gay Pride Weekend, in Photos
Parades to celebrate gay pride were held around the world this weekend, commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising in New York.
It was a day to recognize gains — and demand new ones.
In Istanbul, participants were forced to disperse after the Turkish police fired tear gas and rubber bullets, and in Singapore participants protested anti-gay statutes.
But in North Macedonia, revelers gathered for the Balkan country’s first Pride parade. And in Paris, they braved sweltering heat to turn out for the city’s annual festivities.
[Read more of our coverage on the Pride celebrations in New York City.]
Around the world, hundreds of thousands poured into their city’s streets to rejoice and to continue to fight for gay rights and visibility. 
In Turkey, several hundred activists and supporters showed up for the Pride parade on Sunday, despite it being banned by the authorities for the fifth year in a row. They dispersed after the police began firing tear gas and rubber bullets on an Istanbul side street. 
People in painted faces and colorful costumes march down the streets of Milan on Saturday, waving flags and holding signs in the city’s Pride parade.
In North Macedonia, participants held hands during the “Skopje Pride” march, a first for the conservative Balkan country, which is awaiting talks to join the European Union.  
Tens of thousands of people joined in Mexico City’s Pride parade, reveling underneath rainbow-colored banners and umbrellas. The city was the first Latin American capital to legalize gay marriage, in 2009.
Gathered in a “Pink Dot" demonstration in Singapore, protesters demanded the repeal of a statute that criminalizes sex between men in the country. The annual event, which promotes the acceptance of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, is the closest thing Singapore has to a gay pride parade.
In Barcelona, parade participants rode atop of a bus waving rainbow-colored fans during the Pride parade.
In Peru, one participant ran out of steam during the Pride festivities. 
Participants in Ecuador celebrated the same month that the highest court there legalized same-sex marriage, making Ecuador the latest country in the Americas to recognize marriage equality.
People held signs and rainbow-colored flags under a strand of balloons in Lisbon during Saturday’s Pride parade event.
Supporters of the L.G.B.T. community danced in the streets in Chennai on Sunday. Last September, India’s top court struck down a law criminalizing homosexuality, though discrimination persists in the country.
Thousands of activists and L.G.B.T. rights supporters paraded in the French city on Saturday, waving rainbow-colored flags and riding atop trucks, despite a crippling heat wave. 
Members of Queer Youth Group, a gay rights organization in Nepal. 
