SYDNEY, Australia — A man set himself on fire after a standoff with the police near the Sydney offices of the Department of Immigration and Border Protection on Friday, the police said, unleashing screams and smoke and prompting a rapid rescue by firefighters and the police.
“Police made attempts to negotiate, however the man lit himself on fire,” the police said in a statement. “Police were ready with a fire extinguisher and extinguished the man.”
The police declined to identify the man or his nationality but said that it was an act of protest and that the man was not seriously hurt.
“He was protesting at the Immigration Department this afternoon,” Detective Superintendent David Donohue said at a news conference. He added that the man “is a person who suffers from mental illness.”
The police appear to have been well prepared in part because they said they had previous experience with the man and because threats of self-immolation in protest against Australia’s immigration policies are somewhat common.
Officials and employees with the department said there were a handful of cases each year in which asylum applicants threatened to set themselves on fire over a rejection of their asylum claims or other frustrations.
The department’s offices in Sydney, which are in a busy business district near a university, are often put on lockdown during such instances — as they were again on Friday around 2 p.m.
Some employees who had gathered outside said they were familiar with the routine and the police response.
The police said the man suffered “superficial burns,” mainly to his leg.
Yuko Usui, 39, who was working at a cafe nearby, described seeing smoke and hearing what seemed to be a gruesome ordeal.
“I heard somebody screaming very bad for like 15 minutes,” she said.
Employees from the immigration office said the area smelled strongly of kerosene. A video from the scene showed a man being loaded into an ambulance.
It is not yet clear what exactly the man was protesting. It could have been a personal protest, related to his own immigration status or that of a loved one, or a broader act of political resistance against Australian immigration policy.
Australia’s approach to immigration is a controversial mix of tough policies to limit immigration, but also partial acceptance of it.
The country’s overall refugee intake between 2005 and 2015 ranked it 26th in the world. In September of last year, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull announced a new $130 million commitment to aid for refugees and migrants that will expand Australia’s current refugee intake from the United Nations to 18,750 from 13,750 annually.
At the same time, however, Mr. Turnbull and his immigration minister, Peter Dutton, have actively promoted the country’s strict refusal to allow anyone to reach Australia by boat — attracting harsh criticism from the United Nations for the treatment of refugees in offshore detention centers — and praise from immigration hard-liners worldwide.
This year, the Turnbull government again cracked down, making it harder to become a citizen and restricting temporary work visas.
The country of 24 million is still in the midst of a period of rapid internationalization; new census data shows that half the population was born overseas or has at least one parent born overseas. And in recent years, acts of self-harm as protest have become more common.
In 2009, a Pakistani refugee died after setting himself alight outside Parliament House.
In 2014, two Tamil asylum seekers set themselves ablaze in separate incidents. At least one of the men said he was driven to it after being denied a visa to stay in Australia.
And last year, several refugees set themselves on fire on Nauru, one of two remote islands where Australia has been holding asylum seekers caught at sea. At least one of them died.
At the time, Mr. Dutton, the immigration minister who has just been elevated to a new post encompassing oversight of intelligence and counterterrorism, blamed immigration advocates.
He said they were “encouraging some of these people to behave in a certain way, believing that that pressure exerted on the Australian government will see a change in our policy in relation to our border protection measures.”
He has said repeatedly that no protest, no matter how severe, would lead Australia to change its refugee policy. This week he noted that the country’s strict approach had successfully kept people from trying to reach Australian shores.
