Syrian Government Starts Campaign to Retake Last Opposition Stronghold of Idlib
BEIRUT, Lebanon — The Syrian military and its allies have begun a long, slow and violent campaign to recapture the last province in the country still under opposition control,  where the government has gradually cornered rebels, extremists and civilians alike.
A victory in Idlib Province, in Syria’s northwest, would help the country’s president, Bashar al-Assad, and his allies Russia and Iran consolidate what increasingly looks like an assured victory in an eight-year-old civil war. But it would almost certainly come at a high cost in life and property.
Last Wednesday, with airstrikes splitting open the Syrian countryside near their home, the Esmail family was selling everything they could not carry: their carpets, their washing machine, their refrigerator.
On Thursday, they packed up the rest. On Friday, they searched frantically for shelter outside the danger zone, knowing not where to flee, but only that they must.
“People don’t want to end up in the fields, like we saw on TV and social media,” said Alaaeddine Esmail, a former journalist from Idlib.
Over the course of the war, Idlib has become a repository for opposition fighters and supporters who were bused there after the government recaptured their areas and gave them a choice: surrender, or go to Idlib. The province’s population has more than doubled to about three million during the war.
A strained stability had held in the area since September under a cease-fire deal between Russia and Turkey, which borders Idlib to the north. But Russia has been growing impatient with Turkey’s inability to make good on the agreement, which called for it to root out Idlib’s extremist rebels and help reopen an important trading route that the Syrian government needs to rebuild its economy.
The Assad government wants to recapture the whole country, including northeastern Syria, an area that an American-backed coalition runs after recently driving out the Islamic State; the northern borderlands, which Turkey controls; and Idlib. But the presence of the Turks and the Americans in the north and the east has so far kept the Syrian government and its allies at bay.
Southern Idlib Province and parts of Hama Province, just to the south, have come under heavy attack in the past three weeks from Russian warplanes and pro-government forces. Syrian soldiers on the ground have also regained control of at least 12 villages clustered around Idlib’s southern corner, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a war monitoring group based in Britain.
In Idlib and Hama, pro-government bombing has destroyed or disabled at least 19 hospitals and medical centers in 20 days, leaving doctors operating in basements and patients unable to find treatment. The violence on both sides has killed about 223 civilians since April 20, the Observatory said. And at least 16 humanitarian groups have suspended operations in the area just when the need has grown especially acute.
The new offensive has forced more than 180,000 residents to flee, and thousands more to consider following them, not knowing when their villages’ turn might come.
