Ukraine’s New President Dissolves Parliament and Calls a Snap Election
KIEV, Ukraine — Minutes after taking office on Monday, Ukraine’s new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, announced a snap parliamentary election that he hopes will consolidate his power and help him deliver on campaign promises to end endemic corruption and a prolonged separatist conflict.
Mr. Zelensky, a political neophyte who gained popularity as a television comedian, said in his inaugural address that his first priority is to reach a cease-fire in the war against Russian proxies in the country’s east that has claimed 13,000 lives.
The new president won a landslide victory in April, leading a political party, Servant of the People, that was registered just last year, and does not yet hold any seats in the Ukrainian Parliament. Voting for a new Parliament had been scheduled for October, but Mr. Zelensky dissolved the current Parliament and moved the election to July, aiming to seize an advantage while he remains very popular and his party is running far ahead of its rivals in most recent opinion polls.
During the campaign, he capitalized on the failure of the incumbent, Petro O. Poroshenko, a wealthy business magnate, to deliver economic growth, defeat corruption or end the war.
In a stark contrast with his predecessor, Mr. Zelensky, 41, walked to the Parliament building for his inauguration Monday, shaking hands and taking selfies with people. Switching easily between Ukrainian and Russian, he said in his speech that the new government would do everything to win the hearts of the Russian-speaking population in the embattled east.
“The government didn’t do anything for them to feel themselves Ukrainians,” Mr. Zelensky, who is the country’s youngest post-Soviet leader, said in his address. “I am not afraid to make difficult decisions, I am ready to lose my popularity, my ratings if needed, or even my post as long as we achieve peace.”
At his request, the country’s defense minister and the head of the security service, allies of Mr. Poroshenko, resigned. Volodymyr Groysman, the prime minister, said he would step down, too.
Mr. Zelensky said he was ready for dialogue to end the war and urged Russia to release Ukrainian prisoners and return territories Ukraine has lost. Russia seized Crimea in 2014, and since then Moscow-backed separatists have taken control of a swath of the country that borders Russia.
The Kremlin seemed unimpressed. President Vladimir V. Putin will only congratulate Mr. Zelensky “on the first successes” in resolving the separatist conflict and in mending ties with Russia, his spokesman said.
“In terms of Crimea, we have said many times that there cannot be any question about who owns it,” said the spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov. “Crimea is a region of Russia.”
Mr. Peskov also called the separatist conflict Ukraine’s “domestic problem” and said that no meetings between the two presidents are currently on the agenda.
While Mr. Zelensky became famous as a comedian who both ridiculed presidents and performed in front of them, in his speech he said he realized that he now has a different job to do.
“My whole life I tried to do everything to make Ukrainians laugh,” he said. “Now I will do everything to make sure Ukrainians at least won’t cry any more.”
