Nobel Peace Prize Winners Throughout History
“For their efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and armed conflict.” Read more »
“For its work to draw attention to the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and for its groundbreaking efforts to achieve a treaty-based prohibition of such weapons.” Read more » 
“For his resolute efforts to bring the country's more than 50-year-long civil war to an end, a war that has cost the lives of at least 220 000 Colombians and displaced close to six million people.” Read more »
“For its decisive contribution to the building of a pluralistic democracy in Tunisia in the wake of the Jasmine Revolution of 2011.” Read more »
“For their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education.” Read more »
“For its extensive efforts to eliminate chemical weapons.” Read more »
“For over six decades contributed to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Europe.” Read more »
“For their nonviolent struggle for the safety of women and for women's rights to full participation in peace-building work.” Read more »
“For his long and nonviolent struggle for fundamental human rights in China.” Read more »
“For his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples.” Read more »
“For his important efforts, on several continents and over more than three decades, to resolve international conflicts.” Read more »
“For their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change.” Read more »
“For their efforts to create economic and social development from below.” Read more »
“For their efforts to prevent nuclear energy from being used for military purposes and to ensure that nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is used in the safest possible way.” Read more »
“For her contribution to sustainable development, democracy and peace.” Read more »
“For her efforts for democracy and human rights … especially on the struggle for the rights of women and children.” Read more »
“For his decades of untiring effort to find peaceful solutions to international conflicts, to advance democracy and human rights, and to promote economic and social development.” Read more »
“For their work for a better organized and more peaceful world.” Read more »
“For his work for democracy and human rights in South Korea and in East Asia in general, and for peace and reconciliation with North Korea in particular.” Read more »
“In recognition of the organization’s pioneering humanitarian work on several continents.” Read more »
“For their efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Northern Ireland.” Read more »
“For their work for the banning and clearing of anti-personnel mines.” Read more »
“For their work towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor.” Read more »
“For their efforts to diminish the part played by nuclear arms in international politics and, in the longer run, to eliminate such arms.” Read more »
“For their efforts to create peace in the Middle East.” Read more »
“For their work for the peaceful termination of the apartheid regime, and for laying the foundations for a new democratic South Africa.” Read more »
“In recognition of her work for social justice and ethnocultural reconciliation based on respect for the rights of indigenous peoples.” Read more »
“For her nonviolent struggle for democracy and human rights.” Read more »
