SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea said on Saturday that Alek Sigley, the Australian student whom it deported this past week, had been a spy who admitted to “systematically” collecting information about the isolated country, with a state news agency reporting that he had been “caught red-handed.”
Mr. Sigley, 29, a graduate student in Korean literature at Kim Il-sung University in Pyongyang, was freed in North Korea on Thursday and deported on the same day. Until now, neither Mr. Sigley nor the North’s government had publicly explained why he had been detained.
On Saturday, North Korea’s official Korean Central News Agency, using the initials for the North’s official name, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, said Mr. Sigley was caught on Tuesday while “committing anti-D.P.R.K. incitement through the internet.”
“He honestly admitted his spying acts of systematically collecting and offering data about the domestic situation of the D.P.R.K. and repeatedly asked for pardon, apologizing for encroachment upon the sovereignty of the D.P.R.K.,” the news agency said. North Korea expelled him with “humanitarian leniency,” it said.
Mr. Sigley could not be reached for comment. But after his release, he said as he emerged at Beijing’s international airport on Thursday, “I’m O.K., I’m good.” He declined then to address a reporter’s question about why he had been detained.
Mr. Sigley then traveled to Japan to be reunited with his wife, Yuka, in Tokyo, and said in a statement on Friday that he intended to “return to normal life” and would not comment further.
While studying in Pyongyang, he had contributed occasional columns about his life in the North to outside news media, including NK News, which is based in Seoul, the South Korean capital, and specializes in news about North Korea.
The Korean Central News Agency said that Mr. Sigley had acted at the instigation of NK News and other “anti-D.P.R.K.” news outlets, providing them several times with information and photos he had collected in Pyongyang by making use of his foreign student card. The official news agency did not provide further details about Mr. Sigley’s alleged acts of spying.
Chad O’Carroll, the head of NK News, said in response to the North Korean claim, “Alek Sigley’s well-read columns presented an apolitical and insightful view of life in Pyongyang, which we published in a bid to show vignettes of ordinary daily life in the capital to our readers.”
“The six articles Alek published represent the full extent of his work with us, and the idea that those columns, published transparently under his name between January and April 2019, are ‘anti-state’ in nature is a misrepresentation which we reject,” he added.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia and Mr. Sigley have thanked Swedish diplomats for working on Australia’s behalf to help free him. Australia does not have an embassy in Pyongyang and relies on the Swedish Embassy there to protect its citizens in the North.
Mr. Sigley was the rare Westerner who embraced life in North Korea, offering glimpses into life in Pyongyang through his frequent posts on Twitter and Facebook, as well as his news media columns, which included images of local cuisine, restaurants and shops. As of Saturday, his Facebook page was unavailable.
He wrote that he was careful not to comment on politics in North Korea, but in June, his family lost contact with him. While he remained missing, there were worries that he might be facing harsh conditions in the North’s prison system. In 2017, an American student, Otto F. Warmbier, died after falling into a coma while being detained in North Korea.
In December, a judge ordered the North to pay his family more than $500 million. This past week, his parents filed a claim for a North Korean cargo ship that was seized by the United States in May, noting the asset could be used to pay off part of the judgment.
Western visitors to North Korea are relatively few. But some American and other foreigners have been arrested and given draconian sentences for what to outsiders may appear to be minor infractions, such as handing out proselytizing materials or stealing a government sign. North Korea often releases the American detainees after prominent United States celebrities, like former presidents, pay the country a visit.
North Korea is holding at least six South Koreans, three of whom were sentenced to hard labor for life on espionage charges. But so far, the North has appeared to be more lenient toward Australians.
In 2014, the North arrested an Australian Christian missionary, John Short, on charges of secretly distributing missionary materials while visiting a Buddhist temple in Pyongyang. He was deported after the North said he had apologized for violating North Korean laws and asked for leniency.
