Australia Diary collects reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. We’d love to see your story too. Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com and click here for more information.
On a warm day in Westmead we marked an important milestone in every Australian adult’s life: The first property purchase.
Jiva’s search for a flat had ended here in a suburb of Sydney, one the most expensive cities in the world — that’s also one of the world’s most multicultural urban areas. 
As the incense burned and prayers were chanted, Jiva threw flower petals in offering to the goddess. 
Looking around the room I was struck by the eclectic mix of people, a reflection of Jiva’s history as well as Australia’s. 
For one thing, a lot of us had been refugees from civil wars who resettled here, back in the days when the country’s refugee policy was not so hard-line: Iraq, Bosnia, Sri Lanka — where Jiva and his family hailed from — and Vietnam, in my family’s case. 
The rest were different kinds of migrants, like Anglo-Australians a few generations in and people like Sonal from the United Kingdom — though her Gujarati family had fled Uganda under Idi Amin. 
I saw a young woman wearing tortoise shell glasses and I couldn’t place her yet she looked familiar — until I realized I’d actually taken a photo of her and posted it to Instagram last month. 
I’d seen her speaking about illustrating a picture book at Lost in Books, a multilingual kids’ bookshop in Fairfield. She was collaborating with a writer I knew, Zarlasht, whose parents had come to Australia in the '70s from Afghanistan as Colombo Plan scholars. 
Turns out Uma was a distant cousin of Jiva’s and they’d recently found each other through Facebook.
Toward the end of the pooja, our ceremony, Jiva motioned to one of his aforementioned Anglo-Australian friends to lead a final prayer. Before starting Phil said softly to the many Hindus in the room, “Sorry for my pronunciation.” 
As he chanted fluently, one of the women kept looking at him and smiling, as though she couldn’t quite believe her ears.
Sometimes a new home includes surprises. Sometimes, so does Australia. 
