May and Corbyn, Old Adversaries, Weigh a Brexit Partnership
LONDON — Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn eyed each other uncertainly on Wednesday, like two subjects in a laboratory experiment.
Wednesdays are the days, in British politics, when the leaders of the government and the opposition face off in the scorched-earth partisan slugfest known as Prime Minister’s Questions.
It is a spectator sport: For 30 minutes, the leaders skewer each other with clever put-downs and hostile questions, each backed by hundreds of lawmakers mooing and jeering in support.
But this Wednesday was different.
Prime Minister May and Mr. Corbyn, the leader of the Labour Party, were preparing to try something truly risky — to set their party loyalties to the side and try to devise a plan together, in a last-ditch effort to save Britain from a chaotic exit from the European Union.
Cross-party cooperation goes so profoundly against the grain, in Britain’s old, tribal Parliament, that Wednesday had a slightly unreal feeling, as if the laws of physics had been suspended.
Mrs. May and Mr. Corbyn circled each other gingerly during Wednesday’s question time, glancing one by one over issues that divided them — unemployment, the minimum wage, the cost of television licenses — but they were mechanical, phoning it in. Neither said much about the one thing that mattered: Brexit, and the meeting they would have later in the day.
It fell to Mrs. May’s own party members, trained to fear and mistrust Mr. Corbyn, to nail her to the wall.
“Prime Minister, if it comes to the point where we have to balance the risk of a no-deal Brexit versus the risk of letting the country down and ushering in a Marxist, anti-Semite-led government, what does she think at that point is the lowest risk?” asked Caroline Johnson, a Conservative who had, up until now, displayed staunch loyalty.
She was referring to accusations that under Mr. Corbyn, the Labour party has failed to tackle anti-Semitism within its ranks.
Lee Rowley, another Conservative lawmaker, reminded the prime minister of words she had spoken last week, when she said Mr. Corbyn was “the biggest threat to our standing in the world, to our defense and to the economy.”
“In her judgment,” he continued, “what now qualifies him for involvement in Brexit?”
The rumblings from Tory Brexiteers were ominous all day. Two ministers resigned in protest over the talks between Mrs. May and Mr. Corbyn, one sputtering his outrage that “you and your cabinet have decided that a deal — cooked up with a Marxist who has never once in his political life put British interests first — is better than no deal.”
Then Mrs. May and Mr. Corbyn vanished into a room with their teams, and, shortly thereafter, a great thunderclap split the air above Westminster.
There was nothing to do but wait.
“Will they put party before country? Or country before party?” asked Rob Ford, a professor of political science at the University of Manchester. “There was always going to come a moment when the irresistible force of tribal partisan loyalties and distrust of the opposition came up against the immovable object of a no-deal Brexit deadline.”
“If they don’t do something,” he added, “they’re all going down together.”
By compromising, each runs the risk of inflicting permanent damage on their fragile parties, which are both deeply split over Brexit. And one thing they have in common is that their entire adult lives have been spent serving their parties.
Mr. Corbyn, who grew up in the prosperous and conservative Wiltshire countryside, was one of the few boys in his school to sign up with the Young Socialists, Labour’s youth wing, at 16. Mrs. May began working for the Conservative party before she was a teenager, spending weekends with Tory matrons stuffing envelopes and delivering fliers.
“The party is her life,” Mr. Ford said. “She is an old-school kind of politician. Her whole life is bound up with it.”
By pivoting to a form of Brexit that Mr. Corbyn could endorse, likely one with closer ties to the European Union, Mrs. May will likely lose the votes of 40 or 50 of her own lawmakers, but could potentially gain 150 votes from Labour lawmakers, Mr. Ford said.
Labour is deeply split, with most members in favor of a second referendum and a large faction intent on stopping Brexit altogether. Many Labour supporters warned Mr. Corbyn against cooperating with the prime minister, cautioning that she might be setting a trap, so that Labour would be held responsible for a failed policy.
Grace Blakeley, who covers economics for the New Statesman and supports Labour, said she had come to the view that Mr. Corbyn should compromise.
“Initially I would have said absolutely not,” she said. “But at the moment there is so much general disdain directed toward our political class, and that hasn’t discriminated according to party. There has been a bit of antipathy toward Labour as well.”
The vast majority of people in Britain, she said, “are looking at the politicians and saying, ‘Why can’t they get on with it?’”
Tony Travers, a professor of government at the London School of Economics, tried to imagine what the meeting would be like.
“They aren’t either of them warm, friendly, easygoing people,” he said. “It will be stiff and formal, not showing the warmth of human interaction that good negotiation surely needs.” In their public debates, he said, while Mr. Corbyn stuck to diatribes about poverty, but Mrs. May was often “banging on about him personally.”
“This is not the best starting point for a handshake over a glass of whiskey,” he said.
Startlingly, nothing leaked from the leaders’ two-hour meeting until late afternoon, when the city was enveloped by a freakish storm, which buffeted the city with lumps of crusty, wet snow known in meteorological circles as graupel.
After the meeting, the government’s spokesman called the talks “constructive.”
Mr. Corbyn released a statement saying he and Mrs. May had discussed the benefits of a customs union but made no commitments.
“I also raised the prospect of a confirmatory vote,” he said, meaning a public vote seeking approval of any deal. “The prime minister remained resistant to this proposal,” he wrote.
The government said the talks would continue. If the two leaders are able to agree on a plan, it could be put to a House of Commons vote on Monday.
