What to Watch For in the European Parliament Election Results
BRUSSELS — With more than 400 million Europeans across the 28 countries of the European Union entitled to vote in the European Parliament elections that end on Sunday, the poll is, next to India, the largest democratic exercise in the world.
But since these elections began 40 years ago, when the bloc was only 15 countries, turnout to vote for the Parliament — the bloc’s only directly elected branch — has decreased every five years.
Turnout was among the key indicators: Would it decline below the 42.6 percent of 2014, or would Europeans respond to calls from both populists and mainstream politicians who suggested that this election was important for the future of Europe?
[Follow our coverage of European election results.]
Over all, preliminary figures later on Sunday showed that for 27 nations, excluding Britain, turnout was nearing 51 percent, according to the European Parliament spokesman, Jaume Duch Guillot, the highest in at least 20 years. Turnout was also higher this year than five years ago in key countries like France, Germany, Poland and Spain. It was roughly the same in Italy and marginally higher in Slovakia, where traditionally less than 20 percent of eligible voters bother to vote. In France, turnout was projected to break 50 percent for the first time since 1994.
With much attention on how the continent’s various strands of populists will do, another crucial question is whether the populist surge will produce a counterreaction among voters who support the European Union but are traditionally more apathetic.
Marietje Schaake, a liberal Dutch lawmaker who is not running for re-election, said the vote was “between the builders and the breakers.” The breakers have more passion; will the builders and the pro-Europeans have come out to vote?
Results for all 28 states will be released late Sunday after the last polls close. Here are some of the main issues at play.
There are varying strains of populists in Europe, and they do not all agree with one another.
But they are united for the most part in opposing immigration, strengthening Europe’s borders, hammering “the elites” and increasing the power of national governments against “Brussels,” a generic word for the European Union’s technocratic bureaucracy.
[In Parliament Elections, Populists Seek to Break the E.U. From Within]
The populists as an unruly collective are making most of the noise, led by the rollicking Italian deputy prime minister, Matteo Salvini of the right-wing League. Mr. Salvini has campaigned hard, and has pulled other far-right leaders into some rallies in the hopes of creating a more coherent transnational bloc in the European Parliament.
He has had some success, but it is hard to create an “internationale of nationalists,” especially since, just to pick one example, he is sympathetic to and supportive of Russia, while Polish populists of the governing Law and Justice party are viscerally anti-Russian.
They are so anti-Russian that Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the effective head of Law and Justice, said last week that Marine Le Pen, the far-right leader in France, was “obviously linked to Moscow and receives its support.” Given its size, Poland has a significant number of seats, but the Polish populists will have difficulty working with Ms. Le Pen and Mr. Salvini.
The center-right and center-left groups of parties, which together had long created a working majority in the Parliament, are both expected to lose seats.
Populists and euroskeptics may win as many as 180 of the 751 seats, enough to create lots of trouble. While most of those elected will be more traditional pro-Europeans, the old working majority is expected to disappear.
Those parties will have to seek alliances with liberal and centrist parties, perhaps including the Greens group and La République en Marche, the party of President Emmanuel Macron of France, to try to defeat blocking tactics by euroskeptic and populist members.
The next president of the European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm, is selected by the leaders of member governments, but that choice must be approved by Parliament.
In 2014, the bloc experimented with having “leading candidates” from each parliamentary group, and giving the job to the candidate of the largest party. That was Jean-Claude Juncker from the center-right European People’s Party.
But no one is happy with the system, and some, like Mr. Macron, want to scrap it. That may be easier this year, since the European People’s Party is expected to lose seats and its leading candidate, Manfred Weber, has no executive experience.
There will be lots of horse-trading in the next weeks and months about who gets which top jobs — which involves balancing among big states and small; north and south; conservative, centrist and socialist; and male and female. And it is up to Parliament to approve all of the various new commissioners.
These elections are national, and most people vote on national issues, despite Europe’s major jobs being at stake. Much like midterm elections in the United States, these elections are an opportunity for protest votes against the government of the day.
Significant national outcomes include France, where Mr. Macron has a lot riding on beating Ms. Le Pen’s far-right party, the former National Front that has been rebranded as the National Rally. To lose to her, even if it has no direct impact at home, would damage his political clout and credibility, and undermine his standing in European disputes.
Mr. Macron is a big target for the populists, because he has gone out of his way to deride them and set himself up as the defender of Europe and increased federalism against those who want to disrupt it.
Italy is also important. Mr. Salvini will do well, but how well? If his League significantly outscores his coalition partner, the populist left-wing Five Star Movement, he may decide to break the coalition and call new elections to try to become prime minister.
Polls indicate that Italians may be getting tired of Mr. Salvini, but how tired?
In Poland, too, these elections will be seen as a marker on the performance of Law and Justice, which is sharply criticized by Brussels for its Hungary-like efforts to distort and control the judicial system.
Law and Justice, which strongly favors European membership but wants less interference from Brussels, faces a collection of opposition parties calling itself the European Coalition. Poland has national elections this autumn, probably in October, and this vote will be considered a guide to that more important one.
The German vote will be seen as a judgment on the floundering center-left Social Democratic Party, the far-right Alternative for Germany and on the new leader of the Christian Democrats, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, who hopes to succeed Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Austria will also be interesting, since this election will be the first chance for voters to judge the breakup of the country’s governing coalition of the center right and far right, after the resignation of far-right Vice Chancellor Heinz-Christian Strache and his colleagues over a video that raised questions over Russian influence on their party. Will Chancellor Sebastian Kurz and his People’s Party be rewarded or punished?
Then there is Britain, which voted to leave the European Union three years ago, but finds itself voting for a European Parliament anyway, since it has not managed to agree on how to make Brexit work.
With Prime Minister Theresa May having announced her resignation on Friday, these European elections are both a joke and highly serious. They represent the return to electoral life of Nigel Farage, the former U.K. Independence Party leader whose new Brexit Party is expected to win, while the Conservatives and Labour are expected to do badly.
That may affect the next British national election, let alone whom the Conservative Party decides to name as the next prime minister.
That person is almost sure to be in favor of Britain’s leaving the European Union, unlike Mrs. May, who voted originally to remain in the bloc and then, as prime minister, could not find a Brexit formula that could win the support of her own party, let alone a majority in Parliament.
