   In New Zealand, it took just one mass shooting — not thousands — to spark definitive, nationwide change. 
   Its parliament on Wednesday approved sweeping gun control laws banning nearly all semiautomatic weapons as well as attachments that would modify existing firearms. The bill passed with a vote of 119-1 in the House of Representatives less than a month after a gunman opened fire inside two separate mosques in the city of Christchurch and killed 50 worshipers gathered for weekly prayer. 
   New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern vowed to implement stricter gun safety measures in the immediate aftermath of the devastating terrorist attack, sparking an accelerated process of debate and public submission that will allow — pending the New Zealand governor’s approval — the measures to officially become law on Friday. 
   “We are ultimately here because 50 people died and they do not have a voice,” Ardern told lawmakers. “We in this house are their voice. Today we can use that voice wisely.” 
   Thousands of voices in the United States have been lost in mass shootings. 
   The 2012 tragedy at Sandy Hook Elementary left 20 children and six adults dead. Another 50 people were killed when a gunman unleashed a hail of bullets inside the Pulse nightclub in Orlando in 2016, and 59 concertgoers were killed during a country musical festival on the Las Vegas strip just a year later. In 2017, a gunman opened fire on crowds at the Route 91 Music Festival from his hotel room on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay casino-hotel. He shot off more than 1,100 bullets while country star Jason Aldean performed during the third and final day of the music event before turning the gun on himself. 
   Investigators discovered thousands more unused bullets in the shooter’s two-room suite as well as 23 guns. His arsenal included 12 rifles that had been fitted with “bump stocks,” a device attached to semiautomatic weapons that allow for rapid-fire shooting speeds 
   Despite the fact that it was the deadliest shooting in modern U.S. history, with more lives claimed than those in the New Zealand mosque attacks, the U.S. government was slow to develop additional gun safety legislation to curb future incidents of mass violence. 
   It took more than a year — 443 days — for the federal government to heed a widespread call to ban the controversial bump-stock device, which went into effect just last month. And while that may seem delayed, it’s far more active of a response than the one to the shooting at Pulse from the year prior. 
   A shooter approached the Florida nightspot on foot around 2 a.m. on June 12, 2017. He used a SIG Sauer MCX semi-automatic rifle and a 9mm Glock 17 semiautomatic pistol to gun down dozens of patrons gearing up for last call at the Orlando bar. While his firearms differ in several ways from an assault rifle, their similar high capacity and quick-reload functions reignited debate on whether to update the United States’ lapsed assault weapons ban. 
   The 1994 Federal Assault Weapons Ban, which expired in 2004, applied to 118 models of the firearm, defined as a military weapon that can either fire continuously or in short bursts with a single trigger. 
   Years after the carnage at Pulse and beyond, there is still no national ban on assault weapons — which was also the firearm of choice for a student who used an AR-15 semiautomatic rifle to kill 17 of his classmates and teachers inside Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on Valentine’s Day in 2018. 
   Student survivors responded to the attack by kicking off a sweeping advocacy campaign — which includes everything from trolling politicians on Twitter to organizing marches in the nation’s capital — to demand gun safety and a ban on the assault weapon used against their friends and teachers. 
   Just more than a year after the shooting at Parkland, the Democrat-controlled House passed the Bipartisan Background Checks Act of 2019, which would require background checks on all firearm sales, including private ones. 
   The Senate however, has yet to take on the bill, and there are very few lawmakers calling for an outright ban on semiautomatic weapons as Ardern has done. 
   While New Zealand differs in several ways from the United States — there are fewer guns there, it doesn’t have a second amendment and the population is significantly smaller — the nation’s speedy response has triggered a grim comparison with the limited steps taken to curb gun violence in America, where citizens remain mostly divided on the issue. 
   News of New Zealand’s latest legislation only further illustrated the contention surrounding the matter of gun control in the United States, with activists and officials across the country offering both praise and critique for the gun safety measure. 
   “This is how you do it. This is how women do it,” said Shannon Watts, founder of Moms Demand Gun Sense for America. “This is how we will do it. Bet on it.” 
   David Hogg, an activist and one of the student survivors of the Parkland shooting also praised New Zealand officials while taking a swipe at American lawmakers and the National Rifle Association. He said the gun safety measures are what happen “when your government is not owned by gun manufacturers.” 
   Tomi Lahren, a conservative commentator and Fox Nation Host, meanwhile waved off the weapons ban being implemented on the other side of the world. 
   “All those praising New Zealand for gun control and banning semi-autos …. Feel free to move to New Zealand! Bye!” she tweeted. “This is the United States of America and we still believe in the second amendment.” 
   Ardern on Wednesday acknowledged they did face some opposition from firearm owners in announcing the new gun safety legislation, but that in the face of tragedy, most citizens understood its necessity. 
   “We are here just 26 days after the most devastating terrorist attacks created the darkest of days in New Zealand’s history. We are here as an almost entirely united parliament. There have been very few occasions when I have seen parliament come together in this way and I cannot imagine circumstances where that is more necessary than it is now,” the New Zealand prime minister said. 
   “My question is simple. You either believe that here in New Zealand these weapons have a place or you do not. If you believe, like us, that they do not, you should be able to believe we can move swiftly. An argument about the process I an argument to do nothing.”   
