‘It’s Not Getting Better’  Nigeria Braces for Election Day as Frustrations Boil
GWAGWALADA, Nigeria — The seven sewing machines were quiet at Diamonds Empire on a recent morning. The blades of a standing fan were still. Adama Daniel sat behind the front desk of the dark, stuffy tailor shop and moped.
The blackout in the neighborhood not far from the capital had started nearly 28 hours earlier. Customers were waiting on suits, dresses and a tiger-print miniskirt. Mr. Daniel was contemplating firing up his generator, but that would cut into his profit margins.
In 2015 when he cast a ballot for president, Mr. Daniel, who is 29, thought he would be in a better place by now. He had bounded into a polling station to throw his support behind Muhammadu Buhari, who seemed bursting with ideas to grow the country’s lackluster economy. Mr. Daniel was elated when his candidate won. Finally, he thought, the country was on the right path.
Now, with a presidential election set for Saturday, any economic gains of the past four years are far from evident in Mr. Daniel’s daily life. This weekend when he walks into the voting booth, Mr. Daniel is going to cast his ballot for Mr. Buhari’s main opponent, Atiku Abubakar.
“He had four years and couldn’t do anything,” said Mr. Daniel, speaking of the president. “Another four years won’t make a difference.”
Although Mr. Buhari did make notable moves toward improving the economy during his term, the impact has not registered widely. His crowning achievement: pulling the oil-dependent nation out of a grueling recession.
He also chipped away at inflation. He banned imports of rice and other food to help local farmers. He moved more than five million people onto the tax rolls. Earlier this week, officials announced the last quarter of 2018 was Nigeria’s strongest quarter of growth since the recession ended in 2017.
In a speech on Thursday night, he said Nigerians were seeing his economic efforts “bearing fruit.”
But outside the wealthy elite, all that means little to countless Nigerians. Mr. Daniel, for one, spends $200 a month to buy diesel fuel for his generator to keep his business going. He’s anxious to finish his medical degree but administrators at his school, and all public universities, keep striking for months at a time to agitate for better resources. His brother has an engineering degree but can’t find a job that pays more than the tailors earn at Mr. Daniel’s shop.
Mr. Abubakar, who has put economic issues at the center of his campaign, “knows what Nigerians need,” said Mr. Daniel.
Nigeria is bracing for what could be a tight election this weekend. Threats of violence loom.
In the northeast of the country on Tuesday, a convoy heading to an election event and carrying Kashim Shettima, a state governor, was attacked by Boko Haram, an extremist Islamist group which operates in the region. At least three people were killed, officials said. Many of the governor’s entourage fled into the bush after militants dressed as soldiers and riding in stolen military vehicles attacked, local news media reported.
The incident drew attention to another of Mr. Buhari’s 2015 pledges: to destroy Boko Haram. Far from being crushed, Boko Haram has recently been gaining strength.
In the south, militants in the oil-rich Delta threatened to disrupt the economy, presumably by blowing up pipelines, if Mr. Buhari were re-elected. At a rally for the president in Rivers State this week, at least four people were killed in a stampede. Election officials reported fires in several sites where ballot materials were being stored.
Tensions have been so high that after the American ambassador to Nigeria called on both campaigns to carry out fair elections, Mr. Buhari’s party called his statements “implicit attacks against the government.”
Mr. Buhari and Mr. Abubakar, who each have pledged to accept the election results peacefully, wrapped up final appearances this week at rallies across the country, where thousands turned out wearing dresses, rings, hats and scarves plastered with their candidates’ photos.
But across Nigeria, Africa’s most populous nation, life grinds on far from the rallies, the violence and the political maneuvering.
In Abuja, the capital, people cluster along the exhaust-choked highway all day, selling bags of bread from a nearby bakery at a markup. Metal drainage grates are missing from a major road, swiped by thieves hoping to sell them for scrap. Men playing after-work table tennis at a park complain about the price of rice and building materials.
More than half of Nigeria is living in poverty, according to the World Bank. The grim situation has forced everyone to think only of themselves, some civil leaders fear.
Hamzat Lawal, an anti-corruption activist who worked on a campaign to get more young people to run for office, said, “A lot of people are disconnected to the Nigerian dream where we’re all united and connected.”
Mr. Lawal supports neither of the two leading contenders. Mr. Abubakar, a former vice president, and Mr. Buhari, a former general who was in power under military rule in the 1980s, are establishment candidates who are both in their 70s. Fifty-one percent of the 84 million registered voters are between the ages of 18 and 35, according to government officials.
Last year Mr. Buhari called Nigerian youth “lazy,” alienating many. On Thursday, his official Twitter account posted: “It is understandable that we all want to live comfortable lives. It is also important to realize that the most comfortable thing we can all do is to work hard and live within our means.”
His health has also been an issue. He spent months abroad being treated for an illness he has yet to disclose. He was missing from public view for so long and rumors he was dead grew so loud that he publicly denied he was a clone of himself.
As an incumbent, Mr. Buhari carries a huge advantage. He has introduced poverty programs, including free school meals. Access to education in general has increased. He pledged recently to raise the minimum wage.
“He’s trying,” said Nana Lawan, who wore a dress with Mr. Buhari’s face stamped on it at a rally this week.
Yet many graduates say they can’t find jobs. Unemployment is rampant. Salaries are stretched for people who do have jobs. Some civil servants don’t receive regular paychecks. The price of fuel has increased. People complain rent and public transit prices are too high.
“Do you see any customers in here?” huffed one shopkeeper in his tiny, empty store at Abuja’s largest market, where dresses were stacked to the ceiling. “Atiku says he will make things better,” he said, speaking of Mr. Abubakar.
Inside the market, frustration was rampant. Look around, Ruby Shaibu King said, pointing to the people braiding hair, painting toenails and selling spiked heels and cheap plastic bowls.
“Most everybody is a graduate,” said Ms. King, who is in her third year of university, majoring in mass communications.
Jude Ben has a degree in business administration. He styles hair, along with dozens of others at the market. He’s so frustrated that he’s not voting.
“I’m 25-years-old and they told me Nigeria is going to get better,” he said. “It’s not getting better. When will it be better? When I’m in my 40s or 50s?”
