Budget Cuts May Undercut the U.N.’s Human Rights Committees
GENEVA — United Nations’ human rights officials and other experts have criticized planned budget cuts by the international body that would force the cancellation of hearings to monitor government compliance with human rights standards.
While the savings would be modest, about $2 million, the cutbacks would have “disproportionately serious consequences on the implementation of international human rights law,’’ said Rupert Colville, a spokesman for Michelle Bachelet, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Ms. Bachelet has told the committees that oversee compliance with 10 core multilateral treaties that they will probably need to cancel hearings set for later this year.
Six of the committees likely to be affected oversee adherence to treaties that uphold children’s rights and combat civil and political repression, discrimination against women, torture and racial discrimination.
The proposed cuts are the result of some member states delaying payments to the United Nations, Ms. Bachelet’s office said.
Human rights experts who serve on the committees, which are known as treaty bodies, said they were appalled by the planned cuts.
Malcolm Evans, a British law professor who is chairman of one of the two committees that work to combat torture, said in an interview that he had reacted to the proposed pullback with “something between consternation and incredulity.”
“That something as significant as U.N.-level oversight of compliance with states’ international human rights commitments was to be set back like this was shocking,” he said.
Human rights organizations, which value the committees as a significant mechanism for holding nations accountable for abuses and violations of their legal obligations, also expressed alarm.
“This comes at a time when human rights are under increasing threat,” said Anna-Karin Holmlund, a senior advocacy officer for Amnesty International, citing the United States’ withdrawal from the Human Rights Council last year and a decision by the Philippines to pull out of the International Criminal Court.
“Unfortunately, this is only the latest in a worrying trend of financial challenges facing the U.N.’s human rights mechanisms,” Ms. Holmlund said.
The human rights office is formally considered one of the United Nations’ three pillars, along with peacekeeping and development, but it receives less than 4 percent of the organization’s budget. The office has a budget of $97 million this year, a sum that human rights experts say bears little relation to the significance of its mandate to promote and protect human rights around the world.
The cuts to the work of the committees are part of a wider cost-saving drive. In addition to the members’ delays in paying dues this year, the United Nations is owed more than $1 billion in long-term arrears, most of it from the United States.
The challenge for the committees stems mainly from a 25 percent cut in travel expenses to ease the organization’s immediate cash flow problems.
While travel is a discretionary expense for most United Nations bodies, it is the only cost incurred by the human rights committees, whose members work without pay but travel for meetings. They are reimbursed for travel and related expenses.
Reducing the committees’ hearings and other activities is likely to have drastic repercussions beyond this year. The hearings are the culmination of years of preparatory reports by governments and human rights activists.
Canceling or deferring these hearings “could have a very negative impact on the respect and credibility of the treaty bodies,” said Jens Modvig, chairman of the committee against torture. “Instead of going in a direction where we become more regular and credible, we may be considered less regular, less stable, less credible.”
Human rights activists have similar concerns. “This doesn’t bode well at all,” said Puja Kapai, a law professor at Hong Kong University who has co-written reports to several of the committees and had been anticipating planned appearances by China before four of the human rights committees.
With Hong Kong’s institutions under growing pressure from an increasingly assertive Beijing, international rights conventions represent “the last guarantees left for us to rely on to ensure there isn’t continuous encroachment on our rights” Ms. Kapai said.
The United Nations “is a lifeline for many people around the world and particularly in China,” she said.
Cutting financing to the committees “worries me because that lifeline is cut off,” she added. “The only oxygen that is there for human rights advocates is being cut off, that’s the biggest threat.”
