Muslim U.K. Lawmakers Receive Threatening Packages With Letter
LONDON — The British police are investigating threatening packages received this week by Muslim members of Parliament that contained a letter calling for “Punish a Muslim Day” and, in some cases, a noxious substance.
Sajid Javid, the secretary for housing, communities and local government in Prime Minister Theresa May’s cabinet, was among those who received the letter. Mr. Javid posted on Twitter a photo of the letter sent to him on Thursday.
It said that people would be awarded points for harming Muslims on April 3 for a series of offenses — from verbally abusing them to burning or bombing a mosque to nuking Mecca.
The government says that from 2013 to 2017, hate crimes nearly doubled in England and Wales, and those motivated by religious hatred nearly quadrupled. Organizations that monitor extremist groups say that far-right violence, in particular, is on the rise.
Anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim views have increased in the wake of a series of terrorist attacks in Britain and other parts of Europe, and helped fuel the 2016 vote in Britain to leave the European Union. Last week, the leaders of the anti-Muslim extremist group Britain First, which has drawn widespread attention, were convicted of hate crimes and sent to jail.
Muslims in several parts of the country began receiving the “Punish a Muslim Day” letter last week, according to the police and anti-hate groups, which noted similarities to threatening letters sent to mosques and individuals last year.
The packages were sent to British officials at their offices in Whitehall Palace, where Parliament meets, and some offices were evacuated and sealed off on Monday and Tuesday, when the first three parcels were opened. Some contained a sticky irritant, and several staff members were taken to hospitals as a precaution, but a parliamentary spokesman said the substance was found not to be harmful.
In Parliament on Wednesday, Mrs. May denounced what she called “unacceptable and abhorrent behavior, which has no place in our society.”
Rushanara Ali, one of the lawmakers targeted, told BBC radio, “Ethnic-minority and Muslim M.P.s are no strangers to threats from extremist groups, but the level of far-right violent threats and far-right activity has become very worrying.”
Demonstrating the high level of anxiety, a fifth Muslim member of Parliament said on Tuesday that his office had received a suspicious package and had been evacuated, but that the police had found nothing untoward in it.
Police and ambulance crews were sent again to Westminster on Thursday, in response to another suspicious package, but officials did not disclose to whom it was addressed, or what it contained.
