Trump Will Meet Queen Elizabeth II Next Month, His Ambassador Says
President Trump will meet Queen Elizabeth II during his long-delayed first trip to Britain next month, the United States ambassador to Britain said on Wednesday, an encounter that could reignite furor among British critics who oppose his deeply divisive policies and his polarizing personality.
The ambassador, Robert Wood Johnson, announced the planned encounter in an interview with Sky News, the British broadcaster.
He said while the details were still being worked out, they include a meeting with the monarch.
“Yes, yes, I mean, he has to see the head of state,” Mr. Johnson said. “Putting his foot on British soil, it’s Job 1, it’s very important, very symbolic. Meeting Her Majesty is the most important thing, because she’s the head of state, and from then on, it’ll be what the president wants to do.”
Mr. Trump is said to have described his mother, a native of Scotland, as a “big fan” of the queen, according to The Sunday Times of London.
But not everyone is so excited.
Outrage at Mr. Trump, who is deeply unpopular in Europe, has mounted over the past week amid the worldwide attention on the American government’s practice of separating children from their undocumented migrant parents along the United States-Mexico border. (Mr. Trump signed an executive order on Wednesday, rescinding the practice.)
“In the last 3 days President Trump has backed the caging of children, talked of migrants ‘infesting’ the country, withdrawn from the UN Human Rights Council, made repeated lies about crime in Germany and we are honouring him with a visit to Windsor Castle to meet the Queen,” a British lawyer and political commentator, Peter Stefanovic,  wrote on Twitter.
The planning for Mr. Trump’s first visit to Britain as president, slated on July 13, has been bumpy. He was originally set to visit in January, to celebrate the opening of a new United States Embassy.
At the last minute, however, he scrapped that plan, expressing his dissatisfaction over the building’s location and cost. Observers said the cancellation was a calculated effort to forestall his exposure to protesters.
Prime Minister Theresa May first extended an official visit invitation on behalf of the queen to Mr. Trump during her visit shortly after his inauguration in January 2017.
He accepted it, but the British public reacted with anger as more than 
