Canadian Hostage Freed From Taliban Is Charged With Sexual Assault
OTTAWA — Joshua Boyle, the Canadian man who was held hostage along with his American wife in Afghanistan for five years, has been arrested and faces 15 criminal charges, court records show.
The charges include sexual assault, forcible confinement, drugging and assault, and all involve events that happened after Mr. Boyle and his family returned to Canada in mid-October. Court documents show that Mr. Boyle was arrested on Monday.
Since being freed by Pakistani troops along with his wife, Caitlan Coleman Boyle, and their three children who were born in captivity, Mr. Boyle has described several gruesome episodes that he said occurred during their captivity. Among other things, he said that members of the Taliban-linked Haqqani network raped Ms. Coleman and killed their fourth child, an infant.
Ms. Coleman Boyle has said that the captors beat their eldest son.
It is still unclear why the couple took what many viewed as an exceedingly dangerous trip into an unstable region of Afghanistan during 2012.
The first of the events that led to the charges Mr. Boyle now faces, according to court documents, occurred on Oct. 14, and the most recent was on Dec. 30. The charges include misleading the police.
A court order prohibits the publishing of anything that might identify the two people who the Ottawa Police say were Mr. Boyle’s victims.
The Ottawa Police declined to comment.
“Mr. Boyle is presumed innocent,” Mr. Boyle’s lawyer, Eric Granger, wrote in an email on Tuesday. “He’s never been in trouble before. No evidence has been provided yet, which is typical at this early stage.”
After their release in a dramatic raid, the family initially moved in with Mr. Boyle’s parents in Smiths Falls, Ontario, about an hour from Ottawa. At the time of his arrest, Mr. Boyle was living in an apartment in downtown Ottawa, court records show.
Mr. Boyle, 34, was previously, and briefly, married to Zaynab Khadr, the sister of Omar Khadr, the only Canadian held by the United States military in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. He also acted as the family’s spokesman.
Canadian courts found that Mr. Khadr, who was 15 when captured, was unjustly held. He was offered a formal apology by the Canadian government and agreed to a substantial monetary settlement last year. But Ms. Khadr has been widely rebuked by Canadian politicians and others for many of her public statements, including a defense of terrorism.
