Macedonian Ex-Leader, Facing Prison, Claims to Receive Asylum in Hungary
SKOPJE, Macedonia — A former Macedonian prime minister who fled the country while facing a prison sentence on corruption charges claimed on Tuesday that he had been granted political asylum in Hungary.
The former leader, Nikola Gruevski — who ran the country as a strongman for a decade before being forced out of office in 2016 after nationwide protests — had been sentenced to two years in prison for abusing the power of his office to purchase a luxury vehicle.
He also faces several more serious charges, some stemming from a vast scandal involving hundreds of thousands of secretly recorded conversations in which top government officials were heard discussing crimes like rigging votes and covering up killings.
American diplomats and European officials viewed his trial and conviction as a step forward in a region plagued by corruption and ethnic divisions. Macedonia aspires to join the European Union, and his trial was widely seen as sending a clear message that even the most powerful politicians could not act with impunity.
The Hungarian government, which initially took nearly two days to confirm that Mr. Gruevski was in Budapest, did not respond to requests for comment on his claim of asylum. But a pro-government newspaper, Magyar Idök, reported that the Hungarian Immigration and Asylum Office had established that the legal conditions to grant him asylum had been met.
The paper said that his case was heard on Nov. 12 by the authorities, who found there was a legitimate threat to Mr. Gruevski’s life if he stayed in Macedonia, and that the local authorities could not provide the protection he required.
Mr. Gruevski, in a lengthy post on Facebook, sought to portray himself as a victim.
“I have not fled from justice, but I have used internationally regulated methods to continue my quest for justice,” he wrote. “I have decided not to grant their wish to see me in prison, where, from what I have learned, I was to be eliminated, while they are taking the country apart.”
Macedonian government officials — who were caught by surprise when Mr. Gruevski managed to flee the country and shocked that he would seek asylum in a European Union nation — were aghast at reports that his bid had been accepted. They said there was no truth to his allegations.
The Macedonian government had submitted a request on Monday that Mr. Gruevski be returned to the country. In public statements, American and European diplomats said that the trial had been fair and that he should face justice in Macedonia.
Renata Deskoska, Macedonia’s justice minister, pointed out that asylum procedures usually take a considerable amount of time. “If he really got an asylum,” she said, “it must have been done quite expediently for some reason.”
The government said in a statement that Mr. Gruevski had been convicted in “a fair and transparent procedure” and that he had “never reported any threats for his life.”
“The only reason why he escaped is to avoid justice,” it said.
Mr. Gruevski’s choice of Hungary was not without irony: Under Prime Minister Viktor Orban, the country has instituted draconian measures to keep out refugees fleeing war and starvation.
Mr. Orban also frequently says that no nation should interfere in other countries’ internal affairs, noted Edit Zgut, a foreign-policy analyst in Warsaw. “But this is exactly what they have just done by giving asylum for a convicted politician,” she said.
While Mr. Orban has battled with Brussels on what it means to be a member of the European Union — notably around immigration policy and rule-of-law issues — his decision to grant asylum to a former political ally still came as a surprise to many.
Macedonia is in the midst of one of the most trying times in its young existence as a nation. The government recently reached an agreement with Greece that would allow it to chart a course to join NATO. But to win Greek approval, it agreed to change its name, a highly divisive issue that stirs deep passions in both countries.
Mr. Gruevski’s escape spurred a host of conspiracy theories about how he was able to leave Macedonia on the eve of going to prison, including speculation that he had dressed as a woman to flee across the border, that he had the assistance of the secret services of foreign countries, and even that he had been kidnapped.
In the end, it appears that his escape was less dramatic, if still complex.
According to the authorities in Macedonia, Hungary and other neighboring countries, it appears that he was able to escape into neighboring Albania and — despite his passport being confiscated — travel with his own identification card with the help of the Hungarian diplomatic network to Montenegro, Serbia and, finally, Hungary.
