Clash Over Israeli Settlements Has a New Front  A Delayed U.N. Report
GENEVA — The United Nations human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet, has delayed publishing a database of companies doing business with Israeli settlements in occupied territories, garnering praise from pro-Israel groups and outrage from human rights organizations eager to see the report released immediately.
The United Nations’ human rights office has worked for three years to compile a database of companies that have directly enabled, supported or profited from the settlements, which are considered illegal under international law.
The office was already under intense scrutiny after previous delays in publishing the database. Israel and its allies fear that the database will be used as a blacklist to boycott or penalize companies that do business in the occupied territories. And some businesses are concerned that the database could set a dangerous precedent by holding companies accountable on human rights issues beyond their control.
The United Nations’ Human Rights Council, a 47-member body that has often been accused of anti-Israel bias, voted in 2016 to mandate the creation of the database. In a letter to the president of the council that was released on Tuesday, Ms. Bachelet said she needed more time to consider it “given the novelty of the mandate and its legal, methodological and factual complexity.”
She said she intended to fulfill the mandate to publish the database “in the coming months,” but did not set a date.
The World Jewish Congress expressed “deep gratitude” to Ms. Bachelet for holding off on taking an action that it said could hurt the livelihoods of Israelis and Palestinians. The congress emphasized in a statement on Tuesday that publication should be not just postponed, but “canceled in its entirety.”
However, Human Rights Watch, a rights monitoring organization based in New York, condemned the decision and called on Ms. Bachelet to commit to a date for publishing the database.
“Israeli authorities’ brazen expansion of illegal settlements underscores why the U.N. database of businesses facilitating these settlements needs to be published,” Bruno Stagno Ugarte, an advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, said in a statement. “Each delay further entrenches corporate involvement in the systematic rights abuses stemming from illegal settlements.”
Human rights activists have seen the controversy as an early test of how Ms. Bachelet, a former president of Chile, would balance politics and principle under the intense pressure from governments that human rights high commissioners often face. Ms. Bachelet was appointed as human rights commissioner last August.
The United States had condemned work on the database as outside the mandate of the human rights office and indicative of the Human Rights Council’s deep-rooted bias against Israel. The United States said that such bias was a major reason for its decision to withdraw from the council last year.
Ms. Bachelet’s predecessor, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, had delayed publication of the database, citing lack of resources. But he issued a preliminary report last year that revealed the office was examining the activities of more than 200 companies doing business with the settlements, including 143 based in Israel and 22 in the United States.
Human rights groups monitoring the progress of the research believed Ms. Bachelet’s office had completed its work on the database, and they saw no reason for her not to release it in accordance with the Human Rights Council’s mandate.
But United Nations officials said that the office continued to receive information on companies in the occupied territories and that the database needed to be amended to take account of changes in the companies’ conduct.
“Where they are modifying their performance, we have to take that into consideration in producing the final report,” said Ravina Shamdasani, a spokeswoman for the United Nations’ human rights office.
Ms. Bachelet was not succumbing to political pressure, Ms. Shamdasani said. Publication cannot be indefinitely delayed, she said, but “we have to get it right, and we will put it out when we’ve got it right.”
