Denmark Charges 14 People With Unlawfully Sharing Video of Killing
COPENHAGEN — Two are barely teenagers. The oldest is beyond retirement age. But all three are among 14 people in Denmark who have been charged with unlawfully sharing a graphic video online of the killing of a young woman in Morocco late last year.
The charges follow an investigation into 118 police reports of the unlawful sharing of a video that depicted the death of either Louisa Vestager Jespersen, 24, of Denmark or her friend Maren Ueland, 28, of Norway. It is unclear which woman was seen in the footage.
“The 14 people are accused of violating the penal code by sharing the video — usually via Facebook Messenger or other social networks,” Michael Kjeldgaard, the police chief of East Jutland, said in a statement.
In December last year, Ms. Jespersen and Ms. Ueland were hiking in Morocco’s Atlas Mountains when they were attacked and killed by a group of men who have pledged allegiance to the Islamic State group.
Soon after, the grisly video of one of their killings began to spread online, and was even forwarded to the women’s family members. In the clip, one of the victims is shown screaming while a man cuts her neck with a knife.
The authorities urged people to refrain from sharing the footage and advised them to delete the video if they had it, but it was still widely shared on social media and was even passed among students in schoolyards, the police said.
Twelve of the charges announced on Thursday were for violating the privacy of the victims and their families. Those charges are punishable with imprisonment of up to three years.
Two people were charged with having “explicitly approved of the terrorist act” while sharing the video, a charge that could result in fines or up to two years in prison.
More charges may still come, the police said.
Two 13-year-olds will not be prosecuted in the ordinary courts, but may be referred to a juvenile crime board.
In a statement on Facebook, the blogger Jaleh Tavakoli said that she was among the 14 people charged and that she was “very sorry” and “didn’t intend to expose Louisa,” referring to Ms. Jespersen. She said she did not want to be interviewed but had been critical of the news media for what she saw as hiding the details of the killings.
Carsten Hove, a lawyer representing Ms. Jespersen’s family, said it was “in deep mourning over the tragedy” and found it “extremely burdening and offensive to know that the video showing the murders of Louisa and Maren have been shared on social media,” according to a statement sent to the Danish news media.
The family appreciated the preliminary charges, the statement said, and hoped that the video would no longer will be shared.
The Moroccan authorities have labeled the killings a terrorist attack and charged 20 people in connection with the murders. In a separate video released on Twitter shortly after the women were killed, four men were seen pleading allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State extremist group.
The charges in Denmark may surprise many in the country who were not fully aware of the legal boundaries when it comes to sharing content online. The police say they do not have to take into account whether someone had criminal intent when sharing harmful images online in order to charge them.
In January, the country’s Supreme Court handed a 20-day suspended prison sentence to a 20-year-old man who had shared a widely distributed video of two 15-year-olds having sex. The court determined that the man should have understood that the people in the video were underage and interpreted the footage as child pornography.
That verdict was the first of its kind and may have ramifications for some of the more than 1,000 others accused of sharing the same video.
