Militants Attack Soldiers in Southern Philippines, Leaving 2 Children Dead
MANILA — Militants linked to the Islamic State attacked a group of soldiers on the southern Philippine island of Jolo, setting off a clash that left two children dead, the military said on Sunday.
Six militants from the insurgent group, known as Abu Sayyaf, were also killed in the gun battle on Saturday in a remote village near the town of Patikul, in Sulu Province, the military said. Five soldiers and two civilians were wounded.
The soldiers had been sent to the area, where local Islamist insurgencies have long battled the state, to discuss development projects with village elders. While those discussions were underway, they were attacked by about 30 Abu Sayyaf militants.
Capt. Jaime Abibas of the Philippine Army’s Special Forces unit said the troops had held off the militants and tried to protect villagers who were caught in the crossfire.
He said the civilians had told him: “Please help us, the Abu Sayyaf will kill us and raze our village if they are allowed to enter.”
The two children who were killed were identified as Jahida Usab, 12, and Saiful Abdun, 1.
Brig. Gen. Divino Rey Pabayo Jr., commander of Joint Task Force Sulu, said the militants were trying to keep the government from establishing a stronger presence in the area and diminishing the rebels’ sway among locals.
“The death of the two innocent children and the wounding of other civilians are indicative of the A.S.G.’s desperate actions of sowing fear among the local populace,” he said, using an abbreviation for Abu Sayyaf Group.
The weekend battle on the predominantly Muslim island of Jolo, which took place during the holy month of Ramadan, came five months after an Abu Sayyaf faction bombed a cathedral in Jolo, the capital of Sulu Province, killing 23 people and wounding about 100. The church had been a frequent target of militants, some of whom have pledged allegiance to the Islamic State.
President Rodrigo Duterte deployed additional forces in the region to search for the perpetrators of the church attack, for which officials blamed an Abu Sayyaf leader, Hatib Hajan Sawadjaan.
Mr. Sawadjaan is believed to have replaced Isnilon Hapilon as the regional Islamic State emir after Mr. Hapilon was killed in 2016 during the government’s successful effort to recapture the southern city of Marawi from Abu Sayyaf.
The military said that the attack on Saturday was not unexpected, because soldiers had been pursuing Mr. Sawadjaan’s fighters in the area. In February, militants fired mortar rounds at a group of soldiers conducting a medical mission in Patikul.
