Pope Francis, Amid Abu Dhabi’s Opulence, Celebrates Mass for Its Migrants
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates — The opulence of Abu Dhabi is not subtle.
Bentleys line the roads, glass skyscrapers rise like blades over corporate business parks, a multibillion dollar hotel once used jewels as ornaments, and the presidential palace gleams with marble and sparkles with crystal chandeliers.
But valeting those cars, cleaning those hotel rooms, servicing those high-rise elevators and preparing watermelon appetizers for guests in the presidential palace are millions of migrants, many of whom are Catholics from India, the Philippines and South America.
On Tuesday, the last day of his 40-hour visit to the United Arab Emirates, Pope Francis came to speak to them directly.
“I have goose bumps,” said Khristina Garcia, a 32-year-old emergency room nurse from the Philippines who has lived in Abu Dhabi for five years. She was one of the roughly 135,000 Catholics, many of whom had received a state-sanctioned day off work, who filled the stands and surrounded Zayed Sports City Stadium on a warm and bright Tuesday afternoon. “I feel blessed,” she said.
The Mass, which was also attended by 4,000 Muslims in keeping with the visit’s emphasis on interreligious dialogue, was the largest public celebration of a Christian rite in the history of the Muslim country, where the worship of other faiths is tolerated, but only in private under normal circumstances.
Inside the stadium, tens of thousands of faithful clad in white hats bearing the trip’s emblem of a dove applauded as Francis rode around in his Popemobile.
The crowd at the Mass represented the asylum seekers and economic migrants Francis has spent years defending, but with a twist.
“It is most certainly not easy for you to live far from home, missing the affection of your loved ones, and perhaps also feeling uncertainty about the future,” Francis said in his homily, which he delivered in Italian. “But the Lord is faithful and does not abandon his people.”
He sought to encourage the Christians here in their lives and faith, assuring them that if they continued on, the Lord would provide a way forward. “He can even open paths in the desert,” the pope said.
“I have also come to say thank you for the way in which you live the Gospel,” he said, telling the crowd “of numerous nations, languages and rites” that their church here “bears a likeness” to the biblical Philadelphia, the city of brotherly love, in that they went forward “even in the midst of difficulties.”
Although the United Arab Emirates attracts non-Muslim migrants with the promise of economic opportunity, life in the country can be difficult: Many work in jobs with scant labor protections, the Emirates rarely bestows citizenship on them, and they are often under the threat of being sent home.
The leaders of the Emirates, where members of minority religions are prohibited from professing their faith on the media or in public, have sought to emphasize their openness to other faiths, declaring 2019 as “The Year of Tolerance” and sending its minister of tolerance to Tuesday’s Mass.
“That is why we are hosting this historical visit,” said Thani Ahmed al-Zeyoudi, the country’s minister of climate change and the environment. “To send a message that the U.A.E. model can be replicated anywhere around the world.”
Critics suspect that the country’s tolerance masks an ulterior motive of attracting labor and improving the business climate.
On Monday, the pope said he envisioned a future for the region in which citizenship would be extended to people of different beliefs.
But in his homily on Tuesday, he emphasized the importance of living in peace and giving a good example in a foreign land. He recalled that amid the Crusades, as heavily armed Christians set out for the Holy Land, his namesake, Saint Francis “pointed out that Christians set out armed only with their humble faith and concrete love. Meekness is important.”
Compared to its neighbor and ally, Saudi Arabia, where churches are illegal and outward displays of Christianity can be dangerous, the Emirates are significantly more tolerant. And on Tuesday, praise was effusive for the Emirates both on the stage and in the crowd.
Nonie Villanor, 52, who is Filipino and lives in the Ras al Khaimah Emirate, northeast of Abu Dhabi, came to the stadium on Tuesday with his wife and two daughters, both of whom were born in the Emirates.
Mr. Villanor said he understood why the country’s rulers restricted citizenship, saying the benefits to citizens were so generous that it would be impractical to extend them to the enormous immigrant community.
As an owner of a leather goods business and an investor in the country, he said, he could stay as long as he wanted and planned to retire here, although most foreign workers are generally forced to go home at retirement age.
“My wife and I thought of immigrating to Europe and buying a second citizenship in Malta or Cyprus, but then we thought, this country has given us everything,” he added “Let’s invest here.”
The pope spent most of his visit focusing on interreligious dialogue and pushing for more tolerance and acceptance of Christians in the region. It was a message that resonated with the faithful in the audience.
Austin Mascarenhas, an auditor at a publishing company in Dubai, said his company, which had given him the day off for “the holiday,” had just come out with a new book called “Celebrating Tolerance.”
The pope’s homily, while joyous and uplifting for its Catholic audience, also had a whiff of rebuke for the extraordinarily wealthy Emirates who run this oil-rich country.
Jesus, he said, “built nothing imposing. And when he told us how to live, he did not ask us to build great works or draw attention to ourselves with extraordinary gestures.”
He added that in Jesus’ teachings there was “an overturning of that popular thinking, according to which it is the rich and the powerful who are blessed, those who are successful and acclaimed by the crowds.”
“For Jesus,” he said, “on the other hand, blessed are the poor, the meek, those who remain just even at the cost of appearing in a bad light, those who are persecuted.”
And to a stadium of migrants, many working in the service industry, he added: “He came to serve and not to be served.”
Nelson Sequeira, a 30-year-old elevator technician from Mangalore, India, said he had been in the country for two years and missed his home country. But seeing the pope, he said, “makes me feel better.”
