Revolt at American University Where Pompeo Addressed Middle East
CAIRO — In a fiery speech at the American University in Cairo last month, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo sided with the autocrats who dominate the Middle East and played down the Arab Spring protests that upended the region in 2011.
This week that speech became the trigger for a revolt against the man who hosted it: Francis J. Ricciardone, the university’s president and a former American diplomat. Mr. Ricciardone faces an open challenge from academics at the university, one of the most prestigious in the Middle East, who are angered in part by his decision to give Mr. Pompeo an unchallenged platform.
On Tuesday, the university Senate voted overwhelmingly to declare no confidence in Mr. Ricciardone, a former United States ambassador to Egypt, Turkey and the Philippines and Palau. In a resolution, the academics said that they had lost faith in Mr. Ricciardone’s stewardship of the university and urged its New York-based board of trustees to immediately begin the search for a successor.
The academics said their grievances against Mr. Ricciardone, who has been the university’s leader since 2016, long predated Mr. Pompeo’s speech on Jan. 10. In a letter to Mr. Ricciardone, faculty members cited low morale, complaints about his management style, grievances over contracts and accusations of illegal discrimination.
But those tensions exploded into the open after Mr. Pompeo’s speech, in which he criticized President Barack Obama’s Middle East policies, emphasized his own Christian beliefs and offered warm support to harsh autocrats like President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt who are loyal to Washington.
Academics were outraged at being given no say in running the event. The American Embassy was in charge of the guest list, which meant that only selected faculty members could attend, and Mr. Pompeo took no questions after finishing his remarks.
An email to Mr. Ricciardone from Pascale Ghazaleh, the chairwoman of the university’s history department, was widely circulated on email and Facebook. “Were any of the members of our community consulted as to whether it was a good idea to bring a former C.I.A. director who has spoken in favor of torture to A.U.C.?” she wrote.
In an interview, Ms. Ghazaleh said the event epitomized what was going wrong at the university. “I object to the university being treated as an extension of the U.S. embassy,” she said.
Mr. Ricciardone did not respond to a request for comment. In an email to the university’s staff after Tuesday’s vote, he termed the no-confidence resolution “unfortunate” but said he respected the faculty’s views.
Nonetheless, Mr. Ricciardone said he expected to lead the university through this year as it celebrates the 100th anniversary of its founding.
As the vote of censure reverberated across the campus on Wednesday, some academics sought to distance the furor from Mr. Pompeo. Suggestions that the January speech prompted the vote “politicizes the faculty’s plight and takes us away from the real issues,” Amr Shaarawi, the chairman of the Senate, wrote to colleagues in an email.
Founded by Protestant American missionaries in 1919 as a men-only, English-language university and preparatory school, the institution has grown into a sprawling modern campus with about 6,500 students, many drawn from Egypt’s political and economic elite.
It has also served as a springboard to the Arab world for numerous Western scholars and aspiring Arabists.
Although its name often leads conspiracy-minded Egyptians to view it as a tool of American policy, the university no longer receives much financial support from the United States government. While the State Department provided substantial help in the 1960s and ’70s, in recent years American funding has been largely limited to scholarships that are also offered at other Egyptian universities.
The American University stayed open through the Arab Spring in 2011, having moved to its sprawling suburban campus two years earlier, but later suffered a financial crunch because of a sharp drop in the number of foreign students, whose high tuition fees are a major source of income.
The death of Giulio Regeni, an Italian research student attached to the university who was murdered in early 2016, offered a stark reminder of the potential dangers faced by researchers in Mr. el-Sisi’s Egypt. Italian prosecutors have blamed the Egyptian security forces for the death of Mr. Regeni, who had been studying labor unions, but no one has been brought to justice in the case.
In interviews, several academics said they distrusted Mr. Ricciardone’s background as a diplomat and viewed his management style as highhanded, perhaps more suited to an embassy than a university.
Supporters counter that Mr. Ricciardone has only sought to carry out the wishes of the university’s board of trustees, which is arriving in Cairo this week for an annual review. It may now fall to them to resolve the dispute that divides the president and faculty members seeking his ouster.
