Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
I arrived in Manus on Tuesday morning, and within an hour I’d met a handful of the refugees who have been stuck on this sweltering, remote island in Papua New Guinea for nearly five years.
To many, it feels like an eternity in limbo.
I met one man from Iran who got on a boat at age 20 to flee political persecution and now wonders if he’ll be able to study, work or leave Papua New Guinea before he’s 30. I met another who is 29 and who has come to accept that Manus may have to become his lifelong home.
Australia exiled these men to Manus and an even more distant island, Nauru, to keep them and others from trying to reach Australia by boat, and the boats have mostly stopped.
But there are other long-term consequences that have yet to be fully understood.
Both the refugees (and their families) and this island (and this country) have been forever changed because of Australia’s detention policy.
I’ll explain more in a coming story, and I’d love to hear what you think I should be looking into while I’m here, which is why I’m keeping this introduction shorter than usual — to maximize on-the-ground reporting time.
In the meantime, here are some other things to read from my smart colleagues, along with a recommendation for a device that foreign correspondents like me have rely on.
As always, share this newsletter if you like it, and feedback is welcome at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
With President Trump on an extended tour of Asia, we’ve rolled out a broad range of coverage about the region.
Our correspondents have examined whether President Trump will finally give China what it has long wanted — a special relationship that sets China apart, as the other great power in an emerging, bipolar world. They’ve also explored the American attempt to forge tighter bonds with regional allies, including Australia, and analyzed the change in the president’s language about North Korea in Seoul.
______
We continued our coverage of Manus Island this week, beginning with a report on Tuesday that the Papua New Guinea Supreme Court rejected a bid to restore resources to the detention center. Need a refresher on the road leading to the standoff? Here’s an explainer.
We also have a journal from an area in western Sydney where, one generation on, a community of Vietnamese refugees and migrants have created their own legacy.
And tomorrow, watch the space at nytimes.com/au for our second Australia Fare column from Besha Rodell, who is reviewing restaurants around Australia.
______
Another blockbuster document dump produced a series of articles this week pointing out how the rich and powerful hide money and avoid paying taxes.
The financial records, shared with a number of media outlets, revealed business connections between a  Russian oligarch subject to American sanctions and United States Commerce Secretary Wilbur L. Ross Jr., along with ties between Kremlin-favored tycoons and Facebook.
Apple was also found to have moved billions of dollars from one tax haven to another even after claiming the company paid all the taxes it owes.______
 • Nick Kristof writes about how to reduce mass shootings after the United States’ newest horror, in Texas.
• Aaron E. Carroll argues against food fanaticism, concluding: “If there’s one thing you should cut from your diet, it’s fear.”
• Adam Grant describes why it’s important to teach children how to argue — because it’s good for them.
______
My trustiest companion on my trip to Papua New Guinea: my Mophie charger. I bought it at an airport a couple of months ago, and it’s become indispensable.
With two USB ports, it lets me power up my local and Australian phones, while lugging them around, ensuring that I don’t run out of battery just when I need my phone most. Which used to happen. A lot.
Another random recommendation from the world of foreign correspondence: A simple head-mounted flashlight. You’d be surprised how often it comes in handy while trying to do journalism at odd hours in odd places.
