Skripal Poisoning Suspect Is a Russian Military Doctor, Report Says
A group of investigative journalists and researchers on Monday identified a military doctor employed by a Russian intelligence agency as one of two men suspected by the British authorities of trying to kill a former Russian spy with a potent nerve agent in Britain earlier this year.
The group, which named the other suspect in the poisoning about two weeks ago, identified the doctor as Alexander Yevgenyevich Mishkin. It said he was a graduate of an elite military medical academy who was recruited by a military intelligence agency widely known as the G.R.U.
Last month, British prosecutors filed criminal charges against two Russian men they say traveled in March to Salisbury and poisoned the former spy, Sergei V. Skripal, by smearing the nerve agent on a door handle at his home. Mr. Skripal’s daughter, Yulia, was also poisoned.
The authorities said the men, who were captured on surveillance video near Mr. Skripal’s home, had traveled to Britain using the aliases Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov. While the men were identified as G.R.U. officers, their true names were not disclosed.
British officials could not be immediately reached on Monday evening for comment on the new report, which was prepared by researchers and journalists in Britain and Russia.
The Russian authorities have denied any involvement in the poisoning, and days after the charges were filed, the two suspects gave an interview to Russian state television in which they claimed to be sports nutritionists. They said they had traveled to Salisbury to admire its Gothic cathedral.
But in a series of reports over the last month, researchers from the investigative group Bellingcat and a Russian news outlet, The Insider, have tried to uncover details about the suspects. They said they had discovered passport information linked to the men’s aliases that showed extensive travel, as well as ties to the Russian security services. And they released the names.
They reported that Mr. Boshirov’s real name is Col. Anatoly V. Chepiga, a 2014 recipient of the title Hero of the Russian Federation, most likely for service in Ukraine’s civil war, and released photos of his name chiseled into a war memorial at the Far Eastern military academy where he studied. Only a few officers each year receive the award, which is typically given personally by President Vladimir V. Putin.
