Cambodia’s Opposition Chief Loses Immunity in Treason Case
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia — Lawmakers voted on Monday to approve the prosecution of Cambodia’s opposition leader on charges he committed treason in collusion with the United States.
The vote effectively nullified the parliamentary immunity of the opposition leader, Kem Sokha, his last line of defense against the prosecution announced last week. 
In a speech, the country’s authoritarian premier, Hun Sen, said the treason evidence was so obvious that immunity did not apply. The main evidence prosecutors presented was an old video in which Kem Sokha described having received advice from American advisers on building a political movement.
Mr. Kem Sokha has said he is innocent.
The move against him came amid a growing crackdown on dissent that has focused on people and organizations linked to the United States, which the government has accused of trying to undermine its authority by fomenting revolution.
In his speech, Mr. Hun Sen warned that the opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party could be dissolved if it continued to stand behind Mr. Kem Sokha.
Although Cambodia is nominally a democracy, Mr. Hun Sen, 65, has held power for 32 years and announced last week that he intended to continue as leader for at least another decade.
The United Nations human rights chief, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, told the Human Rights Council in Geneva on Monday that he was “seriously concerned” over the sudden arrest of Mr. Kem Sokha on Sept. 3 without a warrant, apparently in contravention of his constitutionally guaranteed parliamentary immunity.
Monday’s parliamentary vote was boycotted by opposition party lawmakers, some of whom have gone into hiding after being named as co-conspirators in pro-government media. Others spent the day traveling to visit Mr. Kem Sokha in the maximum-security prison near the Vietnamese border where he is being held.
Their visit was blocked, said his daughter, Kem Monovithya, who added that his lawyers had also been prevented from seeing him.
Phay Siphan, a government spokesman, said foreign powers, particularly the United States, needed to stop interfering in Cambodia and investigate their own actions, while critics of Mr. Kem Sokha’s arrest should respect the rule of law.
“We don’t want any superpower or anyone to get involved in this case,” he said. “Let it go.”
“If Kem Sokha is involved with foreign agents, a foreign government, to topple the Cambodian government, that is treason,” he added. “During the 1960s they killed those people involved with the U.S., they shot them.”
Apparently in response to the accusations of foreign intrigue, the United States Embassy in Phnom Penh this week began posting pictures of a bright red fish on Twitter and Facebook, accompanied by the hashtag #RedHerringsKH and descriptions of American achievements in Cambodia.
Over the weekend, a local news site closely linked to the government published an editorial in response to the #RedHerringKH posts, accusing the American ambassador to Cambodia, William Heidt, of having “a political intention to ignite people’s hatred against the Royal Government of Cambodia.”
A spokesman for the embassy declined to comment.
Since mid-August, 32 FM broadcasters in 20 Cambodian provinces have been shut down, many of which carried programs by the United States-funded broadcasters Voice of America and Radio Free Asia, whose Phnom Penh offices are under investigation for tax violations.
The Cambodia Daily, a respected English-language newspaper owned by an American family, was shut down last week after the government announced it owed $6.3 million in taxes. The Daily’s owners say that the tax bill was spurious, and that they had not been properly audited.
In response to their refusal to pay, they were sued by the government last week for tax evasion, an offense punishable by jail. One of them, Deborah Krisher-Steele, who lives in Tokyo, was also accused of defamation for criticizing the government’s tax department. Her husband, Douglas Steele, lives in Cambodia and has been barred from leaving the country.
The family also runs a charitable organization that runs education and health care projects, with a focus on building schools in rural Cambodia. On Sunday, they said their charity’s bank accounts had been frozen by the Cambodian government, leaving them unable to pay 100 staff members and forcing them to suspend operations in 90 schools.
