The storm that swept through Rio de Janeiro this week left a wreck in its wake: A landslide swallowed homes, floodwaters rose up in hospitals and power lines collapsed as streets turned into roaring rivers.
Then came the alligators — or, more precisely, their South American cousins, the caimans.
The storm knocked down the walls of a caiman farm in a neighborhood, or favela, that is controlled, like others in Rio de Janeiro, by a heavily armed criminal paramilitary group. This made the local authorities reluctant to enter — and left the creatures, which can grow to be 11 feet long, to swim through the flooded streets, terrifying residents.
The caiman farm stood in the Favela do Rola, in western Rio de Janeiro, one of several sections of the city to be flooded this week. It was unclear how many caimans were bred there, but photographs and videos of the creatures coursing through the floodwaters were shared by several people on social media.
Rejane Guimarães, 38, who has lived in the Favela do Rola for 25 years, said she had spotted two caimans swimming in the murky waters around 10 a.m. Tuesday. She and her neighbors called local officials repeatedly, she said, asking them to remove the creatures.
But the authorities did not even try to help, Ms. Guimarães said. They told her it was too dangerous to go into the neighborhood, she said.
The city’s press office and environment department said Wednesday that although their officials had declined to enter the favela, they were talking with residents to assess the possibility of a joint rescue operation with the military police.
The Rio de Janeiro Fire Department said that it sent a team to the area on Tuesday night, but that it had failed to find the caimans. Residents said they never saw the agents.
For Ms. Guimarães, the caimans felt like the last drop of misfortune after a flood of it. The storm has left at least 10 people dead around the city, including two sisters whose house was swallowed by a landslide, and has caused untold damage to businesses and homes.
At 3 a.m. Tuesday, after trying to rescue some belongings from the waters, Ms. Guimarães ran with her children to her mother’s house. She now fears that she could lose everything she owned in the flood, including her refrigerator, a television and a washing machine she bought only three months ago.
Several people in her community did lose everything, and are sleeping in a local church, relying on donations to eat, Ms. Guimarães said.
“It’s complete chaos here,” she said. “We are really scared, we don’t know how to defend ourselves. These wild animals are totally free now, they could attack us. We don’t know if they’re hungry, what their reaction will be if we see them.”
She dismissed the government’s explanation for why officials did not enter the favela, saying that the mayor himself had been there this year, making promises to improve their lives. Others echoed her comments on social media, poking fun at the city officials’ excuse that the neighborhood was too dangerous to enter.
“Only if the criminals are on boats,” a Facebook user named Vinícius Melo Abade wrote beneath a post on the floods.
“Only if the crocodiles themselves are armed,” wrote another user, Aline Taylor.
Ricardo Freitas, a local biologist who has been studying crocodilians in Rio de Janeiro State for 17 years, was not surprised by the existence of a caiman farm inside a favela. People illegally breed caimans across the city to sell to restaurants, he said.
He also suggested that criminals sometimes use the animals to scare kidnapping victims, though there is no evidence that was the case in Favela da Rola.
Mr. Freitas, who dedicates some of his time to rescuing caimans, said that the creatures do not prey on people, but could eat pets. He said there are around 8,000 broad-snouted caimans, the most common species in Rio, in the city’s western zone.
“It sounds like movie stuff,” he said. “But it’s a surreal reality in Rio de Janeiro.”
