Six Great Reads for Australians on the Culture-Tech Collision
This wrap-up is a new experiment to connect Australian readers with the best of The New York Times. 
Bitcoin may save the internet? Celebrity social media feeds are bunk, and reality TV drag queens can unlock the mysteries of gender?
Clearly there’s a lot to discuss. And we (that’s our Australia bureau) are here to help, with a few fantastic recent stories about the intersection of pop culture and technology — handpicked for Australian readers.
When you’re done reading, come on over to our NYT Australia Facebook group for more discussion.
______
Some of us are human, some of us are bots. It sounds dystopian, but really: it’s just your social media feed.
This report shines a light on social media’s murky black market, where politicians, athletes and celebrities are buying millions of fake followers. Even Australia’s politicians have been scrutinized: Tony Abbott reportedly gained 70,000 followers in 12 hours ahead of the 2013 election.
Perhaps more alarmingly, these social drones might be borrowing your identity.
Are my followers human? Tools like Twitter Audit, although not perfect, can tell you how “real” your followers are – or if you’re just tweeting into the bot-o-sphere.
______
If you think Bitcoin is just about money, you’re missing the point.
Bitcoin’s foundation, blockchain, could be our guiding light back to the internet’s utopian, democratic roots. It sounds lofty, but disrupters have changed the nature of the internet before.
And if you still don’t really get what cryptocurrency is, don’t worry: Mr. Johnson, one of Silicon Valley’s most respected tech writers, breaks it down with refreshing clarity.
Should I invest in Bitcoin? No.
There have been a few key moments that flung drag queens into the world’s popular consciousness. One is “Priscilla, Queen of the Desert,” Stephen Elliot’s 1994 colorful and vulgar musical, and most recently: “RuPaul’s Drag Race.”
The original Times review of “Priscilla” applauds how willing the film’s cross-dressing characters are to “laugh at themselves.”
And 24 years later, reality TV host and drag performer RuPaul Charles now carries the torch of unrestrained, anarchist fun over political correctness.
Where can I watch it already? Stream Season 3 of “RuPaul’s Drag Race: All Stars” on Stan.
______
Millions of women around the world have said #MeToo, but the impact of those words can depend on your level of celebrity, wealth, skin color, or just where you are in the world.
In China, the government is blocking phrases like “anti-sexual harassment” on social media, effectively muzzling the movement.
One professor suggests it’s partly because “people are not encouraged to speak up against superiors” in Chinese culture. As Australia continues to grapple with sexual assault on its campuses, could international students be less likely to report harassment?
How can I follow how #MeToo is developing around the world? We’re glad you asked. Sign up to The #MeToo Moment newsletter to get weekly missives on gender and sexual harassment news in your inbox each week.
Who would have thought painstakingly slow, hand-painted messages would be an incredibly effective way to cut through the digital cacophony?
Paul Lindahl didn’t. But he pursued the outmoded career path anyway.
Now, as brands are searching for new ways to convey “authenticity” and “meaning,” Mr. Lindahl is courting names like Gucci, Coca-Cola and Spotify from his paint-spattered Brooklyn studio.
How could it go wrong? By hand-painting your advertisement over a well-loved, 20-year-old community mural, like another company did in the Sydney neighborhood of Newtown last year. It didn’t go down well.
“Whoever thought that operational security could be wrecked by a Fitbit?” said Nathan Ruser, 20, in an interview from Thailand.
Mr. Ruser, who studies international security at Australian National University, recently posted to Twitter his discovery that a fitness app had revealed the locations of military sites in Syria and elsewhere.
The Pentagon is reviewing the situation.
How can I follow this story? Check out Mr. Ruser’s Twitter feed, where he’s commenting and sharing smart takes on the security failure (in between tweets about triple j’s Hottest 100 countdown.)
