Nobel Peace Prize Winners Throughout History
“For their efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and armed conflict.” Read more »
“For its work to draw attention to the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and for its groundbreaking efforts to achieve a treaty-based prohibition of such weapons.” Read more » 
“For his resolute efforts to bring the country's more than 50-year-long civil war to an end, a war that has cost the lives of at least 220 000 Colombians and displaced close to six million people.” Read more »
“For its decisive contribution to the building of a pluralistic democracy in Tunisia in the wake of the Jasmine Revolution of 2011.” Read more »
“For their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education.” Read more »
“For its extensive efforts to eliminate chemical weapons.” Read more »
“For over six decades contributed to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Europe.” Read more »
“For their nonviolent struggle for the safety of women and for women's rights to full participation in peace-building work.” Read more »
“For his long and nonviolent struggle for fundamental human rights in China.” Read more »
“For his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples.” Read more »
“For his important efforts, on several continents and over more than three decades, to resolve international conflicts.” Read more »
“For their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change.” Read more »
“For their efforts to create economic and social development from below.” Read more »
“For their efforts to prevent nuclear energy from being used for military purposes and to ensure that nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is used in the safest possible way.” Read more »
“For her contribution to sustainable development, democracy and peace.” Read more »
“For her efforts for democracy and human rights … especially on the struggle for the rights of women and children.” Read more »
“For his decades of untiring effort to find peaceful solutions to international conflicts, to advance democracy and human rights, and to promote economic and social development.” Read more »
“For their work for a better organized and more peaceful world.” Read more »
“For his work for democracy and human rights in South Korea and in East Asia in general, and for peace and reconciliation with North Korea in particular.” Read more »
“In recognition of the organization’s pioneering humanitarian work on several continents.” Read more »
“For their efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Northern Ireland.” Read more »
“For their work for the banning and clearing of anti-personnel mines.” Read more »
“For their work towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor.” Read more »
“For their efforts to diminish the part played by nuclear arms in international politics and, in the longer run, to eliminate such arms.” Read more »
“For their efforts to create peace in the Middle East.” Read more »
“For their work for the peaceful termination of the apartheid regime, and for laying the foundations for a new democratic South Africa.” Read more »
“In recognition of her work for social justice and ethnocultural reconciliation based on respect for the rights of indigenous peoples.” Read more »
“For her nonviolent struggle for democracy and human rights.” Read more »
“For his leading role in the peace process which today characterizes important parts of the international community.” Read more »
“The Dalai Lama has come forward with constructive and forward-looking proposals for the solution of international conflicts, human rights issues and global environmental problems.” Read more »
“The Peacekeeping Forces of the United Nations have, under extremely difficult conditions, contributed to reducing tensions where an armistice has been negotiated but a peace treaty has yet to be established.” Read more »
“For his work for peace in Central America, efforts which led to the accord signed in Guatemala on August 7 this year.” Read more »
“Wiesel is a messenger to mankind; his message is one of peace, atonement and human dignity.” Read more »
“Performed a considerable service to mankind by spreading authoritative information and by creating an awareness of the catastrophic consequences of atomic warfare.” Read more »
"The committee wishes to direct attention to the nonviolent struggle for liberation to which Desmond Tutu belongs, a struggle in which black and white South Africans unite to bring their country out of conflict and crisis.” Read more »
“Lech Walesa’s activities have been characterized by a determination to solve his country's problems through negotiation and cooperation without resorting to violence.” Read more »
“Alva Myrdal has made public opinion all over the world aware of the problems of armaments, and helped to arouse a general sense of responsibility for the development these involve. García Robles has played a prominent part in the work of disarmament within the United Nations Organization, both in Geneva and in U.N.O.’s special disarmament sessions.” Read more »
"The Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees has, in the opinion of the committee, carried out work of major importance to assist refugees, despite the many political difficulties with which it has had to contend.” Read more »
“He champions a solution of Argentina's grievous problems that dispenses with the use of violence, and is the spokesman of a revival of respect for human rights.” Read more »
“A feature of her work has been respect for the individual human being, for his or her dignity and innate value. The loneliest, the most wretched and the dying have, at her hands, received compassion without condescension, based on reverence for man.” Read more »
“Never has the Peace Prize expressed a greater or more audacious hope — a hope of peace for the people of Egypt, for the people of Israel, and for all the peoples of the strife-torn and war-ravaged Middle East.” Read more »
“Amnesty, so far from shrinking from its task, has stepped up its efforts to ensure that governments in all countries should feel morally obliged to abide by the United Nations' Declaration of Human Rights.” Read more »
“The spokesmen of the desire for a common-sense approach that filled the average man and woman — despite their feeling of helplessness in the face of violence.” Read more »
“Sakharov's struggle for human rights, for disarmament and for cooperation between all nations has peace as its final goal.” Read more »
“Each of these two Peace Prize winners represents different aspects of peace work. With the aid of the difficult art of politics and negotiation they have endeavored by practical means to promote their ideals.” Read more »
“This was a war that concerned not only Vietnam and its people; it was a war moreover that had poisoned the atmosphere in countries and between countries all over the world.” Read more »
“His work for peace means possibilities for peoples of all countries to lead a dignified life without fear.” Read more »
“Dr. Borlaug is not only a man of ideals but essentially a man of action. Reading his publications on the green revolution, one realizes that he is fighting not only weeds and rust fungus but just as much the deadly procrastination of the bureaucrats and the red tape that thwart quick action.” Read more »
“The I.L.O.’s main task will be to ensure that this new world is based on social justice; in other words, to fulfill the command that is inscribed on the document in Geneva: ‘Si vis pacem, cole justitiam.’ If you desire peace, cultivate justice.” Read more »
“For his contribution to the protection of human worth and the rights of man, as set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” Read more »
Read more »
“The aim of Unicef is to spread a table, decked with all the good things that nature provides, for all the children of the world. For this reason the organization is a peace factor of great importance.” Read more »
“The man who has never abandoned his faith in the unarmed struggle he is waging, who has suffered for his faith, who has been imprisoned on many occasions, whose home has been subject to bomb attacks, whose life and the lives of his family have been threatened, and who nevertheless has never faltered.” Read more »
“It is most appropriate that such a decision should be taken this year, for it marks the centennial of the Red Cross. That it should have been possible to constitute the Red Cross and start its work in 1863 is one of the great miracles in human history.” 
“Campaigned ceaselessly, not only against nuclear weapons tests, not only against the spread of these armaments, not only against their very use, but against all warfare as a means of solving international conflicts.” Read more »
“His driving force was his belief that good will among men and nations would one day create conditions in which peace would prevail in the world.” Read more »
“Albert John Lutuli's fight has been waged within the borders of his own country; but the issues raised go far beyond them. He brings a message to all who work and strive to establish respect for human rights both within nations and between nations.” Read more »
“Philip John Noel-Baker has dedicated his efforts to the service of suffering humanity, whether in time of war or in the intervals between wars.” Read more »
“For his efforts to help refugees to leave their camps and return to a life of freedom and dignity.” Read more »
“If it is not possible to stop an aggression without using arms, then call off the fighting as soon as the immediate aim has been achieved, he advises; do not go further, but try to create a situation in which it is possible to work for the ultimate goal, which is peace.” Read more »
“Refugees who dare not return to their native land must be given the opportunity to start a fresh life in their host country. Still more important in the long run is the work of ensuring that people are not compelled to save their lives by escaping from their native land, with no prospect of ever returning.” Read more »
“Throughout your association with us in the higher direction of the armed forces of America and Britain, your unfailing wisdom, high principles and breadth of view have commanded the deep respect and admiration of us all.” Read more »
“Albert Schweitzer will never belong to any one nation. His whole life and all of his work are a message addressed to all men regardless of nationality or race.” Read more »
“He has devoted his life to the work of promoting brotherhood among men and nations, and to the fight against war.” Read more »
“He describes himself: the childhood heritage, the knowledge and experience acquired later in life — both factors going to make up the personality, the man who succeeded in getting both parties to lay down their arms.” Read more »
“For John Boyd Orr the purpose of his scientific work is to find ways of making men healthier and happier so as to secure peace; he believes that healthy and happy men have no need to resort to arms in order to expand and acquire living space.” Read more »
“The Quakers have shown us that it is possible to translate into action what lies deep in the hearts of many: compassion for others and the desire to help them — that rich expression of the sympathy between all men, regardless of nationality or race, which, transformed into deeds, must form the basis for lasting peace.” Read more »
“She has taught us that the reality we seek must be earned by hard and unrelenting toil in the world in which we live, but she has taught us more: that exhaustion is unknown and defeat only gives fresh courage to the man whose soul is fired by the sacred flame." "Mott was at the same time a leading figure in the field of international Christian student and missionary cooperation, and took part during both World Wars in relief work for prisoners of war. He criticized the oppression of colonial peoples and was a pioneer in the struggle against racial discrimination.” Read more »
“ ‘Father of the United Nations,’ Roosevelt called him.” Read more »
“The Committee's principal mission during the last war was to serve as a comprehensive information center on prisoners of war.” 
Read more »
“The work has carried a message to thousands of refugees all over the world who have waited helpless and wretched or have roamed from country to country without respite. But it has borne a message not only to them. It has borne a message to those in politics, that political action has a higher goal than that of sowing discord and harvesting hate.” Read more »
“He called upon the Allies to resist any temptation to exploit their victory to gain mastery for themselves, and appealed to them to create instead a League of Nations for all nations — a league of independent nations, not a superstate.” Read more »
“The principles underlying Saavedra Lamas’s Antiwar Pact have stood a practical test on South American soil and under his personal leadership.” Read more »
“The sum total of a journalist’s work does not reside in the faded print which you can, if you care to take the trouble, seek out and read. The sum total of the journalist's craft, like that of the stage artist, lies in the impact it makes on the minds of others at the time.” Read more »
“As president of the Disarmament Conference, Arthur Henderson exhibits his best qualities: tact and unfailing courtesy, prudent reserve, and at the same time the faculty of taking decisive action when necessary.” Read more »
“What is the ‘Great Illusion’ which Norman Angell wishes to explode? In few — and therefore insufficient — words, it is this: war is a quite inadequate method for solving international disputes; war does not carry any advantage, not even to the victors, least of all any economic advantage.” Read more »
Read more »
“In the poorest districts of Chicago, among Polish, Italian, Mexican, and other immigrants, she has established and maintained the vast social organization centered in Hull-House. … His work for peace began at about the same time as hers, some 25 years ago, and it has been distinguished by tireless energy and a zeal almost without parallel.” Read more »
“The Christian church has sinned grievously and often against the teaching of him whose First Commandment to men was that they should love one another. This church surely has a unique opportunity now of creating that new attitude of mind which is necessary if peace between nations is to become reality.” 
“We must bring people to understand that it is not enough to proclaim war to be a crime, but that it is necessary for all men to recognize with every sense and emotion that the murder of hundreds of thousands of human beings to settle an international dispute is no more justifiable, no more pardonable than the murder of a single individual to settle some personal quarrel.” Read more »
“In presenting the Nobel Peace Prize to Buisson and Quidde, the Nobel Committee wishes to recognize the emergence in France and Germany of a public opinion which favors peaceful international cooperation.” Read more »
“Both Briand and Stresemann have rightly emphasized that every individual must first be a good citizen of his own country — a good Frenchman, a good German, a good Briton — but still a good European bound to other Europeans by the great ideals of the European civilization so gravely menaced by the events of the last war.” Read more »
“The Locarno Pacts, together with Germany’s entry into the League of Nations and the speeches which followed it, hold much promise for the future — they all tend to build up confidence and to strengthen the will to carry on the good work.” Read more »
Read more »
“Work of an international character carried out by Mr. Nansen during these past years has brought him the Peace Prize. I might especially mention his work in the repatriation of prisoners of war, his work for the Russian refugees, his work in aiding the millions in Russia struggling against famine, and now his work for the refugees in Asia Minor and Thrace.” Read more »
“(Branting) a practical statesman and an international pioneer for peace.” “…(Lange) the great organizer with a practical grasp of things, an unswerving idealism, a wealth of knowledge, and a determination to do his duty in good times and bad” Read more »
“The other Peace Prize, awarded to Léon Bourgeois, is accompanied by a salute from Norway to the will for peace of the French people, whom he has represented with great distinction for many years through good days and bad.” Read more »
“In his celebrated Fourteen Points, the President of the United States has succeeded in bringing a design for a fundamental law of humanity into present-day international politics.” Read more »
“It sent delegations to the various war fronts to investigate and to improve the situation of the wounded.” Read more »
Fewer Nobel Peace Prizes were awarded during the world war years. Read more »
“The true leader of the popular peace movement in Europe.” Read more »
“Root is a man of engaging personality who has tried, with determination and independence, to put his ideals into practice.” Read more »
“Asser has above all been a practical legal statesman.” “According to Fried, the foundation of the peace movement should be the legal and political organization of international life.” Read more »
“It was clear from the annual peace congresses that a central office was needed to act as a link between the peace societies of the various countries, and in particular to help the local congress committees to organize the world rallies.” Read more »
“Each of these men holds a prominent position in the international movement for peace and arbitration, and it is therefore fully in keeping with the spirit of Nobel's intentions that the prize should be awarded to them." Read more »
“Untiring advocates of the ideals of peace.” Read more »
“Moneta has belonged to the international peace movement and is its most important Italian representative.” “(Renault) may be said to have been the guiding genius in the teaching of international law in France.” Read more »
“President Roosevelt's happy role in bringing to an end the bloody war recently waged between two of the world’s great powers, Japan and Russia.” Read more »
“While still young she had had the audacity to oppose the horrors of war, and had done so in one of the most militaristic countries in Europe.” Read more »
“The advancement of the idea of justice among peoples will be a contribution of primary importance in securing peace between states.” Read more »
“Our best wish for you is that you may see the ideas of peace and arbitration flourish and gain in strength and influence.” Read more »
“You Swiss, with your sense of life’s realities, have a special gift for taking ideas from the realm of dreams and turning them into realities.” 
“Today when this Peace Prize is to be awarded for the first time, our thoughts turn back in respectful recognition to the man of noble sentiments who, perceiving things to come, knew how to give priority to the great problems of civilization, putting in first place among them work for peace and fraternity among nations.” Read more »
