Jehovah’s Witnesses, Fleeing Russia Crackdown, Seek Shelter in Finland
TURKU, Finland — Sergey Avilkin, one of the hundreds of Russians now sheltering in Finland to avoid arrest as “extremists” in their home country, has no interest in politics or politicians and says that he has always followed the biblical injunction to “render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s.”
But Mr. Avilkin, a 42-year-old father of three, said before President Trump met with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in Helsinki, the Finnish capital, on Monday, that he would like Mr. Trump to ask Mr. Putin a simple question: Why are Russians who pay their taxes, follow the law and embrace the Christian values promoted by the Kremlin being forced to flee their country?
“We don’t steal, we don’t smoke, we don’t drink and always try to obey the law,” said Mr. Avilkin, sitting in the kitchen of the apartment he recently rented for his family in Turku, a city west of Helsinki, while he waits for Finland’s immigration service to process an application for asylum. “But I am 100 percent sure that if I had not left I would now be in prison.”
Along with most of the other Russians who have sought shelter in Finland, Mr. Avilkin and his family are Jehovah’s Witnesses, a Christian denomination that the Russian Supreme Court declared an “extremist” organization and effectively outlawed in April last year.
With issues like arms control, the conflicts in Syria and Ukraine, and Russian meddling in the 2016 election in the United States discussed, it was never likely that the two presidents would have the time — or the inclination — to address the fate of Russia’s Jehovah’s Witnesses when they met. They did not, and neither mentioned human rights at a joint press conference on Monday evening.
But Mr. Avilkin, his wife, Lena, their three school-age children and around 300 other Russians scattered in refugee camps and low-rent housing around Finland are a stark reminder of the obstacles, rarely mentioned by Mr. Trump but still very real, that impede his desire to “get along with Russia.”
The Russian court ruling, which put Bible-reading Christians who reject all violence in the same category of extremism as supporters of the Islamic State, set off a harsh crackdown across Russia. The Jehovah’s Witness headquarters near St Petersburg were seized by the state, prayer halls around the country were raided by the police and scores of believers were arrested.
“What we have seen in Russia since the Jehovah’s Witness organization was banned outright last year is without doubt the most severe crackdown on religious freedom since the Soviet era,” said Geraldine Fagan, the author of “Believing in Russia — Religious Policy after Communism.”
“In key respects, it is uncannily reminiscent of late Soviet-era practice,” Ms. Fagan added.
The State Department has said it is “extremely concerned by the Russian government’s action targeting and repressing members of religious minorities, including Jehovah’s Witnesses, under the pretense of combating extremism.”
But Mr. Trump, who won the 2016 election with strong support from evangelical Christians, has so far remained silent on the matter.
Finland, like the rest of Europe, has years of experience dealing with asylum-seekers, but until Russia branded Jehovah’s Witnesses as extremists, those seeking refuge in the country were largely from the Middle East and Africa.
Anu Karppi, an official in the asylum division of Finland’s immigration service, said that 193 Russians had applied for asylum in 2016, including homosexuals who said they faced persecution and others who fled for economic reasons. In 2017, after the crackdown on Jehovah’s Witnesses began, that number rose to 405. An additional 240 Russians have applied so far this year. Before 2017, only a handful of Jehovah’s Witness from Russia requested asylum in Finland
Ms. Karppi said applicants needed to establish that they faced a real risk, not just a fear, of persecution in order to gain asylum in Finland. The few applications processed so far have been rejected, and Ms. Karppi said that while Russia was certainly “enforcing measures” against Jehovah’s Witnesses, the severity of the campaign varied from region to region.
“We look at every application case by case,” she said. “At the moment, the situation does not seem to be that every Jehovah’s Witness is under the threat of persecution, but we follow the situation closely. If everyone was being persecuted, then everyone would be granted asylum.”
After initially targeting only male Jehovah’s Witnesses, Russian law-enforcement agencies this month arrested a woman, Anastasiya Polyakova, a follower of the denomination in the Siberian city of Omsk. Her husband, Sergey, was also arrested, after being severely beaten during a police raid on their home.
Forum 18, a Norwegian group that promotes religious freedom, reported that more than 50 Jehovah’s Witnesses are now under investigation in Russia on criminal charges of “extremism.”
Unlike many religious groups, Jehovah’s Witnesses, 
