Being There  Our Favorite Dispatches From Every Corner of the World
This year, we invited you to come along as we joined a hunt for the caiman in Bolivia. To attend with us the funeral of a neighbor in Tehran. To traipse at our side the streets of a Russian village drowning in sand. To dodge vicious sea gulls in Rome. To discover Melania Trump’s hometown in Slovenia. And to grieve over the loss of a beloved pet in Bangkok.
In the summer, The New York Times introduced a new feature, the Dispatch, whose goal is to make you feel as if you are right there beside our correspondents as they explore the world, sometimes to report stories to make you smile, sometimes to place you in the middle of a controversy, and sometimes to ask you not to look away from heart-wrenching scenes of tragedy.
The written word is an essential part of this endeavor, and our storytellers have transported you to to some of the world’s most interesting places, like Senegal, where the Baobab tree is beloved; the Solomon Islands, where we introduced you to the Seaweed King and his sinking empire, and Madagascar, where vanilla is as precious as silver.
But to fully immerse you in a place, of course, requires spectacular visuals, and our Dispatches are also created by some of our top photographers, videographers and graphic artists.
Here are some of our favorite Dispatches from 2018. Which ones did you like most?
The arrest of a Russian belly dancer exposed simmering tensions in Cairo’s belly-dancing scene. Critics say foreigners are sullying an ancient art form. Many Egyptians love them.
Halfway around the world, a different form of dance was also changing lives in Brazil:
Led by an indomitable teacher, ballet students in a poor district didn’t let the closing of their school stop them from dancing — or from delivering a pointed message to government officials.
A fading message from a former government official — Adolf Hitler — set off a searing debate in Germany:
Germany’s painful history has become highly personal in a sleepy village, where neighbors are fighting over what to do with a “Hitler bell” in the local church.
In Colombia, an entire city is wrestling with its association with a long-dead drug lord:
If the Colombian city cannot bury the memory of the drug lord Pablo Escobar, it at least wants to control how and where his story gets told.
A city in France is also confronting a horrific chapter from its past:
Nantes played a major role in the European slave trade. Its museum and memorial are a model for other French cities grappling with their histories.
In Syria, a Christian area is dealing with a far more recent atrocity:
While calm has returned to a Christian area of Syria ravaged by the Islamic State, the traumatized people have not, with whole villages emptied. “There are so few of us,” says a church official.
There were bright spots this past year, like this exuberant athletic competition in Kyrgyzstan:
With archers, horses and headless goat carcasses, the World Nomad Games are an effort to revive nomadic traditions from Central Asia and around the world.
And parents around the world probably smiled at this story from China (although maybe their children were less thrilled):
Parents of first-year college students in China live in tents on campus to make goodbyes easier. Critics say they are pampering a generation of only children.
In a town in Guatemala, grieving parents memorialize the journeys their adult children made to the United States:
In rural areas of Guatemala, which have sent a steady stream of migrants north, the United States looms large in the popular imagination, and symbols of American life and culture are everywhere.
An important symbol in Canada — the official home of the prime minister — is in desperate need of renovation:
The prime minister’s residence in Canada has been in bad shape for years, but in a country where it’s political poison for officials to spend money on themselves, the renovation debate rages on.
From the crumbling home of Canada’s leader to lavish recreations of palaces in China:
Hengdian World Studios, in a small town in central China, churns out scores of movies and television series from each period in the country’s history.
From a movie studio in China to a revered tree in West Africa:
Baobabs have endured for centuries as essential cultural symbols. But increasingly, they are threatened by climate change, urbanization and a growing population.
As climate change threatens trees in Africa, it also poses an existential threat to Pacific Islanders:
Three islands in the South Pacific are being swept away by currents and climate change. But the seaweed farmers there are doing everything they can to stay.
From a seaweed farmer forced to adapt to some African elephants that have evolved a strategy to help them defeat poachers:
South Africa’s Addo elephant park has few females with tusks, a trait that has died off because of hunting but also keeps poachers away.
See all our Dispatches here.
