South Korea’s #MeToo Movement Dealt Blow by Politician’s Acquittal
SEOUL, South Korea — A former political star and presidential hopeful was acquitted of sexual assault charges on Tuesday, dealing a blow to the #MeToo movement in male-dominated South Korea.
The politician, Ahn Hee-jung, was the highest-profile public figure to be accused of such misdeeds since the #MeToo movement gained force in South Korea early this year. He stepped down as governor of South Chungcheong Province and was expelled from President Moon Jae-in’s governing Democratic Party in March after one of his female secretaries claimed in public that Mr. Ahn had repeatedly raped her.
In April, prosecutors indicted Mr. Ahn on charges of abusing his supervisory power over the alleged victim to force her into an unwanted sexual relationship.
Feminist activists rallied behind the alleged victim, Kim Ji-eun, while some people raised questions on social media about Ms. Kim’s claims.
Mr. Ahn, 53, has apologized for his behavior, calling himself “foolish” for having a sexual relationship with his secretary. But he maintained that the relationship was consensual.
His lawyers submitted as evidence hundreds of social media messages they said Ms. Kim sent to Mr. Ahn and others during the period she said she was sexually abused by Mr. Ahn. In many of the messages, Ms. Kim was extremely friendly and respectful toward Mr. Ahn, often using emoticons to that effect, the lawyers said.
”Nothing seems able to comfort me except the governor,” Ms. Kim wrote in a message she sent to an acquaintance last September, according to Mr. Ahn’s lawyers.
On Tuesday, a three-judge panel at the Western District Court in Seoul ruled that there was no evidence that Ms. Kim was coerced into having sex with Mr. Ahn.
The scandal has riveted South Koreans for months.
Mr. Ahn competed with Mr. Moon for their party’s presidential nomination last year. Before his downfall, he had been viewed as a potential successor to Mr. Moon, whose five-year term ends in 2022.
People lined up to be admitted into the courtroom hours before it opened on Tuesday, and a shouting match erupted between #MeToo campaigners and supporters of Mr. Ahn.
Ms. Kim was one of the few women to speak out in public since the #MeToo movement began in South Korea. In an interview with a local cable channel, she gave an emotional account of how she said she was sexually abused by Mr. Ahn.
After the ruling, Mr. Ahn told reporters that he would be “reborn.” As he walked out of the courthouse, supporters of Ms. Kim shouted, “It’s not over yet!”
Ms. Kim’s lawyers said they planned to appeal.
The verdict on Tuesday could damage the #MeToo movement in South Korea, said Bae Bok-ju, a representative of the Sexual Violence Relief Association, which advocates for the rights of victims of sexual assault.
“Today’s ruling is tantamount to granting immunity to those with power and authority in an organization to use it for sexual abuse,” Ms. Bae told reporters outside the courthouse. “This is a huge disappointment.”
Men still dominate the top echelons of society in South Korea, enforcing a strictly hierarchical code that analysts say makes women vulnerable to abuse. The World Economic Forum ranks the country 118th of 144 in terms of gender equality.
Since January, a steady stream of women have come forward with accusations of sexual abuse. A number of prominent men, including theater directors, prosecutors, professors and Catholic priests, have apologized for sexual misconduct and resigned from their positions. But the corporate and political elites of the country have been largely untouched by the #MeToo movement.
