SYDNEY, Australia — Just one line in Australia’s Constitution states that dual citizens are ineligible to serve in Parliament, but that brief provision has led nine lawmakers to resign — including the deputy prime minister.
And now, Australia’s democracy is essentially paralyzed, or at least hobbled.
Parliament was supposed to be in session this week, focused on same-sex marriage legislation. Instead, the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull has delayed the meeting until next week, giving lawmakers in the House of Representatives until Dec. 5 to turn in documentation to prove their citizenship status.
Many Australians have responded with anger and eye-rolling; faith in democracy is declining in this country along with Mr. Turnbull’s poll numbers. But legal scholars have been asking more elemental questions: How might this mess have been avoided? And how can it be fixed?
Here are a few possibilities:
Arjuna Dibley, an Australian doctoral student at Stanford University Law School, has proposed a nomination form that would ask questions about where the parents of a potential political candidate were born.
Inspired by work with a lab that applies design principles to public institutions, the document that Mr. Dibley has proposed would help overcome a main cause of the dual citizen problem: people who don’t understand the law relating to citizenship, or the flow of citizenship from a parent.
The current form, he said, asks candidates to sign a declaration that they are “qualified under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth,” without giving a full explanation of the laws related to citizenship. Adding a parental question, he said, would force those seeking office to get beyond legal language and into actual experience.
“By simply asking that question, the idea would be that candidate would think about that issue,” he said.
Drawing on behavioral psychology research, he also suggested moving the declaration to the top of the form, which could prompt candidates to consider their answers more carefully.
Kim Rubenstein, a law professor at Australian National University, has advocated something similar.
“It would be helpful if it was clearer in the nomination form what they need to do to establish whether they fall under Section 44,” she said, referring to the part of the Constitution on eligibility requirements. Requiring extra documentation might in itself prompt candidates to look deeper, even if those documents were not vetted, she said. “This would be a way to assist the candidate in ensuring they have done what they need to do.”
Still, others say changing the form would not tackle the original problem — candidates being ineligible to run — as submitting it is the last stage of the nomination process.
“In many cases, it will be too late, by the time you get to the form,” said Anne Twomey, a constitutional law professor at the University of Sydney. “The reality is people need to make these arrangements and check their qualifications or disqualifications well before you get to the date of nomination.”
What would be more useful, she said, would be a pamphlet that explicitly lays out the relevant cases and rules involving Section 44.
Either way, these proposals share a simple, obvious premise: Force candidates to pay closer attention to their eligibility for office.
The most wide-reaching solution is also the hardest to pull off.
Repealing the dual citizenship restriction, which dates from the Constitution that took effect in 1901, would require a nationwide referendum.
But constitutional change is no walk in the park. Only eight of the 44 referendums carried out in Australia have been successful, scholars say, because support tends to decline in the period between when a referendum is announced and when a vote takes place.
Some experts say a repeal of Section 44 is nonetheless a viable solution.
“If you could get that bipartisan support, I do think you should actually have a strong chance of repealing,” Professor Rubenstein said.
Australians, some scholars argue, would most likely recognize that the citizenship rules are no longer a valid test of national loyalty in a multicultural country in a globalized world.
“I don’t think being a dual citizen is a conflict,” Professor Rubenstein said. “It’s like parenthood: You can have more than one child without having it undermine your sense of commitment to any of your children.”
The most novel answer of them all: Do your homework before pursuing politics.
Many Australians have emphasized that Parliament would be busy this week if would-be lawmakers and their parties were more diligent about investigating their eligibility for the job.
The opposition Labor Party, for example, has more a stringent selection process for candidates, so its lawmakers have so far avoided the resignation wave that has hamstrung Mr. Turnbull’s Liberal Party and some minor parties.
Professor Twomey and Professor Rubenstein said that the Labor Party went further in asking questions about potential citizenship clashes and family history.
The Greens party, which has lost two lawmakers to the dual citizenship provision, has already promised to adopt a more rigorous vetting process.
The Liberal Party, however, has yet to agree on a solution that would scrutinize candidates in advance, instead favoring self-reporting by lawmakers after they have been elected.
The consensus, if there is one, seems to be clear: Australia needs to find a way to make politicians more studious, self-reflective and honest.
“Politicians of parties need to be more organized and make sure their candidates are telling the truth and doing all the right things in advance,” Professor Twomey said. “In the scheme of things, it’s not that hard.”
