   By day, he's a Harvard-educated Wall Street consultant who shows up to work in a staid suit and tie. 
   On the weekends, he dons 75 pounds of armor and tries to clobber his foes into submission with steel swords, axes and spiked maces. 
   Meet Damion DiGrazia, a modern-day gladiator who derives a special kind of joy from getting medieval on other grown men and women. 
   The 37-year-old Manhattan man is a founding member of the New York chapter of the Armored Combat League, a violent international sport that resembles a cross between mixed martial arts and "Game of Thrones." 
   "It takes a special kind of person to stand in front of a 7-foot, 400-pound guy who's coming at you with 100 pounds of armor and a big steel weapon," said DiGrazia. "Think about it — that's 500 pounds of meat and metal trying to crush you." 
   The rules are simple — and savage. 
   Combatants in iron helmets and metal breastplates go to battle with a lethal assortment of weapons drawn from the Middle Ages — axes and maces, swords and winged spears and hammers. 
   Fighters are eliminated from a match when they submit or touch the ground with a weapon or any body part other than their two feet. 
   The battles can be as small as one-on-one or as large as 16-on-16. 
   In all, more than 400 gladiator wannabes participate in the U.S. and in international leagues in such countries as Japan, Argentina and New Zealand. 
   Based out of a custom-made studio in East Harlem, the New York City chapter has about 20 members with their own armor and 40 other newbies. 
   Orlando Mendez, 23, played football and wrestling in high school, as well as rugby in college. 
   But those sports are nowhere near as violent as armored combat, he said. 
   "When you fight someone, you have to go at them as if you're going to kill them," said Mendez, a fashion company shipping manager from the Bronx. "It's pure untapped rage." 
   The sport has other benefits. Mendez said he's lost 55 pounds since he began fighting two years ago at a weight of 225 pounds. 
   "I'm not the biggest guy. I'm not the strongest guy. But I'm very squirrelly. I'm very fast," Mendez said. "If you give me enough space, I'll take you down with a charge." 
   Virgilio Branigan, 37, just started fighting after growing up obsessed with old King Arthur movies. 
   "I've always had a fascination when it came to blades, any kind of swords," said the Bronx man who works at a Manhattan hotel. "I was happy when I found this place." 
   For his part, DiGrazia said he's suffered two dislocated shoulders and a shattered pinkie in his five years of fighting. 
   "It's everything you could want in a sport," he said.   
