Divisive Monuments? Put Them All in a Taiwan Park
To some, he is a hero despite losing a civil war. To others, he is a symbol of oppression. Some of the statues built in his honor have since been removed, but others remain because the cause he represented still has support.
No, he is not Robert E. Lee. He is Chiang Kai-shek, and how his memory has been handled in Taiwan echoes the debate over what to do with monuments to Lee and other Confederate leaders in the United States today.
Chiang, then the president of the Republic of China, fled with his Nationalist forces to the island of Taiwan in 1949 after losing a civil war to Mao Zedong’s Communist armies. On Taiwan, the generalissimo imposed martial law, stamped out opposition and nursed the unrealized dream of reconquering mainland China.
Statues of Chiang were erected all over Taiwan in an effort to cultivate allegiance to his government and a sense of national identity among the local population. But after his death in 1975 and Taiwan’s transition to democracy in the 1980s and ’90s, many people called for the monuments’ removal.
“We don’t want to be part of China, and Chiang Kai-shek represents the idea that China possesses Taiwan,” said Chen Yi-shen, a historian at Academia Sinica, a state-financed research institution. “So in a lot of places his statue has been taken down.”
The campaign to take down some of the island’s thousands of Chiang statues was backed by Chen Shui-bian, president of Taiwan from 2000 to 2008, whose Democratic Progressive Party has traditionally supported independence for Taiwan. But the Kuomintang, the party that Chiang once led, has resisted the campaign.
More than 200 statues of different sizes and colors have been removed and relocated from across the island to a park near Chiang’s mausoleum in Taoyuan, a city in northern Taiwan. In other places, statues have been hidden away, as in a corner of Yongkang Park in Taipei, the capital. But thousands of statues remain untouched across the island.
Debate over what to do with them intensified this year after some were damaged by protesters on the 70th anniversary of a Kuomintang massacre of Taiwanese civilians. A D.P.P. lawmaker has proposed moving all remaining Chiang statues to the park in Taoyuan, including the seated bronze at the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in central Taipei, which still has a military honor guard.
President Tsai Ing-wen, of the D.P.P., has been reluctant to endorse the proposal, out of fear of renewing clashes, said Mr. Chen, the historian.
“In Taiwan there’s the opinions of the Kuomintang and the Democratic Progressive Party, so dealing with something like Chiang Kai-shek is difficult,” he said. “It’s not like your Civil War, which you should relatively easily be able to say is history that’s in the past.”
