Australia’s ‘Egg Boy’ donates nearly $70,000 raised for his legal expenses to victims of the New Zealand Mosque attacks
   The Australian teen well-known for cracking an egg over the head of a far-right politician who blamed the New Zealand Mosque shootings on Muslim immigration has donated nearly $70,000 raised for his legal defense to the victims of the devastating attack. 
   Will Connolly earned the nickname “Egg Boy” and skyrocketed to international fame the day after a gunman opened fire inside two Christchurch mosques, killing 51 worshipers gathered for weekly prayer. The same day, teen was recorded egging Australian Sen. Fraser Anning, who sparked backlash with his inflammatory comments regarding the New Zealand tragedy. 
   “The real cause of the bloodshed on New Zealand streets today is the immigration program which allowed Muslim fanatics to migrate to New Zealand in the first place,” he said. 
   He later took to Twitter to double down on his remarks. 
   “Does anyone still dispute the link between Muslim immigration and violence?” he asked. 
   In clips filmed by both Connolly and local news outlets, Anning can be seen chatting with reporters in Melbourne before the 17-year-old smashes an egg on the back of his head, leaving him dripping with the yolk. The Senator responds by taking a few swings at Connolly, who is eventually tackled to the ground by Anning’s followers. 
   Connolly said in an Instagram post that two GoFundMe pages were subsequently set up to cover his legal defense and to help him “buy more eggs.” 
   “Gratefully, Gordon Legal acted Pro Bono for me so I don’t have any legal fees. I decided to donate all monies to help provide some relief to the victims of the massacre… it wasn’t mine to keep,” he wrote. 
   “I want to thank Corey and @sajjad12345 who set up the funds and every single person who donated to the money and made this possible. To the victims of the tragedy, I whole heartedly hope that this can bring some relief to you.” 
   In all, Connolly donated 99,922.36 Australian dollars — which works out to about $69,173.75 — to two different support groups for people affected by the massacre, the Christchurch Foundation and Victim Support. 
   Connolly was handed an official caution following the incident while Anning was not charged as he acted in self-defense, police said.  
   Anning, who sat in Australia Senate as an independent after quitting the One Nation party early last year, was voted out in country’s May 8 general election.   
