Philippines Struck by Second Big Earthquake in Three Days
MANILA — A strong earthquake struck the southern Philippine island of Mindanao on Thursday, killing at least five people and rattling an area still unsettled from a quake that killed at several people two days before.
The earthquake on Thursday, which the United States Geological Survey measured at magnitude 6.5, struck about 25 miles southwest of the city of Davao, a regional capital of 1.6 million people. 
A village elder was killed in Batasan when the village hall collapsed on him and he was trapped, said Emmylou Taliño-Mendoza, the governor of Cotabato Province. 
Elsewhere in the province, at least four other people were killed, according to the governor, including a 7-year-old child who was crushed by falling debris and two adults buried in a landslide. 
Tuesday’s quake, which was magnitude 6.6, caused wide destruction of schools and other buildings on Mindanao. Classes in much of the area had been canceled since then. The island was also struck by a 6.3-magnitude earthquake on Oct. 16, which killed at least five people.
When Thursday’s temblor struck, more than 12,700 people from nearly 60 villages were in evacuation centers, having been forced from their homes in the Tuesday quake. The one Thursday sent residents panicking and threw ongoing aid efforts into chaos. 
“We need laminated tents and mats because the residents are sleeping outside evacuation centers,” said Ms. Emmylou Taliño-Mendoza. “We also need water or water containers, mosquito nets, food packs and blankets. As for medicines, we need medicines for hypertension, coughs as well as anti-tetanus shots.” 
The quake also caused power to go out in large parts of the affected provinces, she said. 
In some instances, damage to buildings caused on Tuesday may have saved lives on Thursday, as residents avoided homes and buildings thought to be unsafe. 
Images circulating on social media showed the collapsed facade of Eva’s Hotel in the town of Kidapawan. The authorities initially feared that up to 10 people could be trapped in the building, but the town’s mayor, Joseph Evangelista, later confirmed that no one was left inside. 
The Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology on Thursday cautioned citizens against trusting unconfirmed posts on social media reporting that an even bigger quake could be on the horizon.
In Davao, nine people were rescued from an upscale condominium development, where residents had been warned to evacuate after cracks were found following Tuesday’s quake. Rescue workers were still scouring the building in search of casualties, said Lt. Col. Consolito Yecla, who was leading the effort.
President Rodrigo Duterte, a former mayor of Davao, was in the city on Thursday when the latest temblor struck, said Senator Bong Go, an aide to Mr. Duterte.
“A crack appeared on the president’s bedroom wall when the earthquake happened this morning,” Mr. Go said. “The president is safe and there is no need to evacuate him.”
