Protests, Taliban and a Warlord’s Return  Afghan Leader Faces a Tough Year Ahead
KABUL, Afghanistan — In another sign of a tough year ahead for President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan, supporters of his embattled vice president protested on Wednesday in a northern province against what they said was the marginalization of their faction in the government.
The vice president, the former warlord Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, remains under de facto house arrest because of a criminal case against him and his bodyguards who have been accused of abducting a political rival and torturing and raping him. But the case has hit a wall, and the vice president seems to be using a vulnerable moment for Mr. Ghani to settle it on the streets rather than the courts.
Officials close to Mr. Ghani say the president faces major challenges in the months ahead. Taliban militants and affiliates of the Islamic State have conducted a series of brutal attacks around the country recently, making it clear that they will further test Mr. Ghani’s security forces in coming months.
Mr. Ghani also faces renewed political upheaval, having alienated many election-time allies. Adding to the political chaos is the imminent return to Kabul of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a longtime warlord and part of the insurgency with which Mr. Ghani signed a peace deal last fall.
The return of Mr. Hekmatyar, one of the most divisive figures in Afghan politics, is bound to upset other factions. He has been spotted in eastern Afghanistan, and is reported to be making his way to Kabul, the city that was left in rubble in the 1990s civil war in which he played a major role. He has not been back since.
Sadiqizada Nili, a member of the Afghan Parliament, said missteps by Mr. Ghani would come to haunt him in the year ahead. He said the president had tried to centralize power and decision-making around him and a small team, and had ended up alienating even the closest of his allies.
If Mr. Ghani continues this behavior, Mr. Nili said, “things will get to a point where he won’t be able to control them.”
The protest against Mr. Ghani on Wednesday, which included as many as 2,000 people according to participants, was organized by the office of General Dostum. His supporters and aides said the protest, in Jowzjan Province, was the first of others to come in northern provinces.
“We raised our voices to demand our rights, which are not given to us, and to get permission for the first vice president to come to his office” said Massouda Omari, an adviser to General Dostum.
Enayatullah Babur Farahmand, General Dostum’s chief of staff, told the crowd the government wanted to “physically remove your leader.” The general’s entourage was attacked a couple times in Faryab Province last year, and his aides have accused elements within the government of having a role.
Mr. Ghani’s administration has been struggling to figure out what to do with General Dostum, who is accused of abducting a 63-year political rival, Ahmad Ishchi, torturing him, and raping him with the tip of a weapon.
Mr. Ghani’s attorney general has opened a criminal case against General Dostum and nine of his bodyguards, and many Afghans were hoping for justice to be served after years of seeing the powerful get away with abuses. But the process has dragged on for months, and many Afghans feel the vice president is unlikely to be prosecuted.
As a face-saving solution, the government is looking into forcing General Dostum into exile in Turkey again, according to one senior Afghan official who was not authorized to speak on the record. The official said Mr. Ghani had spoken to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey twice about the plan, and once a Turkish plane landed in Kabul to take the general out, but General Dostum refused to leave.
Meanwhile, pressure has been mounting on Mr. Ghani’s government after a string of attacks by insurgents in recent months, including one last week in Balkh Province in which 10 Taliban suicide bombers infiltrated the country’s largest army base in the north and massacred off-duty soldiers. The Ministry of Defense says 135 soldiers were killed, but many officials say the number is most likely much higher, possibly around 300.
Politically, tensions are also high. Last week, Mr. Ghani fired one of his campaign allies, Ahmad Zia Massoud, his “special representative for good governance and reform” who had been the most senior figure from the Tajik ethnic faction in his campaign. Mr. Massoud’s staff was barred from entering their office the day after their boss was fired, and their guards were disarmed and sent home.
Mr. Hekmatyar may also be a troublesome ally for Mr. Ghani, according to some officials and analysts.
“President Ghani is bringing Hekmatyar to join his government, but looking at the ability and popular support that Mr. Hekmatyar has, I don’t think President Ghani will be able to control him once he comes in,” said Mr. Nili, the member of Parliament.
