Kremlin Names Veteran Diplomat as Ambassador to the U.S.
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin on Monday named a career diplomat and arms control expert who is under European Union sanctions as the next Russian ambassador to Washington, replacing an envoy drawn into the swirling questions surrounding contacts between the Trump campaign and the Kremlin.
The appointment of Anatoly I. Antonov, 62, a deputy foreign minister and, somewhat unusually for a diplomat, a former deputy defense minister, had been anticipated. He will start on Sept. 1, said Maria Zakharova, the spokeswoman for the Foreign Ministry.
Ambassador Sergey I. Kislyak, 66, who has been the Russian envoy to the United States since 2008, is due to retire from the diplomatic service. He had told associates earlier this year that the controversy surrounding his meetings with Trump advisers prompted many in Washington to avoid him, and had made the American capital a lonely place.
Mr. Antonov is stepping into a demanding assignment after nearly 30 years in the Russian diplomatic service, where he has been a deputy foreign minister since December 2016. He has been described as a determined negotiator and a hard-liner regarding relations with the United States but also a realist who has echoed the official line that the two countries have too many overlapping interests not to cooperate.
Known as a gruff but intelligent interlocutor, he has a long history working in arms control as well as diplomatic outreach for the Ministry of Defense on issues like the war in Syria.
“He probably knows more than anybody about North Korea’s missile program,” said Vladimir Frolov, a prominent foreign affairs analyst who writes for the Republic.ru online magazine. “He is a smart, savvy guy, very competent.”
Given his specialty in disarmament and other strategic matters, he was deputy defense minister from 2011 to 2016. He focused on military cooperation, frequently serving as the face of the Ministry of Defense abroad.
In February 2015, he was put on the list of officials sanctioned by the European Union and Canada for their involvement in the March 2014 annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
After Russia intervened militarily in Syria in late 2015, Mr. Antonov often delivered the ministry’s news briefings, including one during a period of tension with Turkey in which he accused Ankara of buying oil from the Islamic State. He reportedly returned to the Foreign Ministry after a new defense minister wanted his own man in the job.
Mr. Antonov was often seen as a blunt proponent of Russia’s position, so there was some speculation that he was first anointed as Mr. Kislyak’s successor in anticipation of a tough relationship with the Clinton administration, which did not come to pass.
Michael McFaul, a former ambassador to Moscow, faced Mr. Antonov during talks over a new strategic arms reduction treaty conducted in Geneva when Dmitri Medvedev was the president of Russia. “I remember him as a very tough negotiator,” Mr. McFaul said in an email. “He rarely gave an inch, which meant we — i.e. Obama — usually had to go directly to Medvedev for all the major moves on the treaty negotiations.”
In recent years, as another example, Mr. Antonov argued that Western-backed color revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine and resurgent Nazism in Eastern Europe were a threat even to the Asia-Pacific region.
Alexander Gabuev of the Carnegie Moscow Center observed that at the 2016 Shangri-La Dialogue, an annual defense summit in Asia, Mr. Antonov showed that he was both a charismatic speaker and a consummate bureaucrat in following the “traditional habit of toeing the boss’s line.”
During the question-and-answer session, Mr. Antonov demonstrated both a sweeping knowledge of North Korea’s nuclear program and American plans to deploy a missile defense system in the Asia-Pacific, Mr. Gabuev noted.
Mr. Antonov began his diplomatic career in 1978, after he graduated from Russia’s main diplomatic training ground, the Moscow State Institute of International Relations. He holds a Ph.D. in political science, according to his official biography, and speaks Burmese in addition to English.
His predecessor in Washington, Mr. Kislyak, was known as a tireless networker, but one who stirred controversy because of his meetings with people close to President Trump, including with Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner.
Mr. Kushner has said that he met with the Russian ambassador after the November election to seek a direct line of communication with Mr. Putin as part of his job in establishing foreign contacts.
Two advisers to President Trump ran into trouble for not being more candid about contacts with Mr. Kislyak: Michael T. Flynn, who was forced to resign as national security adviser, and Jeff Sessions, the attorney general, who incurred President Trump’s wrath by recusing himself from any matters having to do with the Russia inquiry.
Mr. Kislyak has been adamant that his meetings were strictly in keeping with standard diplomatic practice of trying to meet and understand Americans from across the political spectrum.
