Chill in Relations Puts Much at Stake for Turks and Germans
ISTANBUL, Turkey — In the hushed reading room of the Turkish-German Bookstore, you’d hardly know Turkey and Germany are seething at each other.
“We are like a family here,” said Thomas Mühlbauer, the German-Austrian manager and co-owner, with his brother, of the store on Istanbul’s main shopping avenue, as students peacefully pored over their books.
The depth and history of the relations between Turkey and Germany mean that much stands to be lost in any potential rupture. That is what has made the precipitous chill between them all the more surprising.
After weeks of acrimonious sniping, the question forcing itself on both sides seems to be just how far can things deteriorate before hard consequences for all become unavoidable.
Last month, Germany slapped Turkey with a policy change that basically halts European economic assistance to the country. Senior officials on both sides have leveled accusations ranging from blackmail and hostage-taking to using Nazi tactics and abetting terrorism. Turkish newspapers have branded German foundations and journalists as spies. German newspapers depict President Recep Tayyip Erdogan as a dictator.
Last week, Mr. Erdogan called on people of Turkish origin in Germany not to vote for Chancellor Angel Merkel in next month’s elections, branding her governing coalition “enemies of Turkey.”
When Ms. Merkel and Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel responded that they would not tolerate such interference, the Turkish leader repeated his call at a rally last weekend.
“Teach them a lesson in the German elections,” Mr. Erdogan urged supporters. “They are waging a campaign against Turkey. Vote for those who don’t have enmity toward Turkey.”
Mr. Erdogan was incensed this spring when German officials prevented him from campaigning among Turkish communities in Germany ahead of a referendum on increasing the power of the president in Turkey. He accused German officials of acting like Nazis.
An even greater source of ire for him, and for many Turks, is that Germany has refused to extradite followers of the Fethullah Gulen movement, which is accused of masterminding a violent coup attempt last year.
Several hundred Turkish citizens, including soldiers and diplomats, suspected of links to the Gulen movement, and one of the most wanted Gulenists, Zekeriya Oz, a former prosecutor, have sought refuge in Germany. About 80 have already been granted political asylum, according to news reports.
“They say the terrorists they took under protection in their country are a judicial matter but they don’t send the files to the court,” Mr. Erdogan railed in a recent speech.
A coup attempt would be a crime in America or Germany, but when it happens in Turkey it becomes an issue of human rights and rule of law, he complained.
However, the historical and cultural ties between the countries make for interlocking needs and interests that may yet serve as a brake on matters going too far.
Germany’s consulate in Istanbul is its biggest worldwide, mainly to handle the immense demand for visas. As many as 3.5 million people with roots in Turkey live in Germany — a legacy that began with thousands of guest workers who helped rebuild Germany after World War II — and maintain extensive family and business ties.
“Every Turkish citizen has a distant relative in Germany,” Mr. Mühlbauer said.
That has left many Turks — and even several presidential advisers — brushing off the growing dispute as electioneering by vote-seeking politicians — Germany holds elections on Sept. 24, and Mr. Erdogan is looking to extend his rule in 2019.
Germany is far too close an ally and important economic partner to fall out with, and the fracas will prove temporary, they say.
A senior presidential aide said he expected the relationship to recover after the German elections. He pointed out that Turkey had more serious disagreements with the United States but the two sides were discussing them without such sniping.
Three million to five million German tourists visit Turkey annually, mainly on package tours to the Mediterranean coast. Istanbul alone drew one million Germans last year.
Germany is Turkey’s biggest trading partner, accounting for 20 percent of Turkey’s imports and 30 percent of its exports. Nearly 7,000 German companies operate in Turkey, some like the manufacturing conglomerate, Siemens, have been present for 160 years.
“Turkey is deeply frustrated with Germany, and the feeling is mutual,” says Ozgur Unluhisarcikli, the Ankara director for the German Marshall Fund of the United States, a research organization, “but economic relations dictate that they do not break ties.”
Yet Germany’s shift in relations will last beyond election campaigns, and the current government, Mr. Unluhisarcikli warned.
Ms. Merkel had long tolerated Mr. Erdogan’s slights and his drift toward authoritarianism, but has drawn the line after several arrests of German citizens, which Berlin has accused Turkey of collecting as hostages or bargaining chips.
The German government announced in July what amounted to a sea change in its economic policy toward Turkey. It wants no new chapters opened in Turkey’s talks to join the European Union, a freezing of work on the customs union modernization, and a reduction of investment and export facilities, which will hurt Turkish businesses.
In the immediate term, Germany wants to see a lifting of the state of emergency in Turkey, which was imposed after last year’s failed coup, and the release of a dozen jailed German citizens, including two journalists and a human rights campaigner, Mr. Unluhisarcikli said.
But more than that, analysts and diplomats say, Germany wants a reversal of Turkey’s creeping authoritarianism. The way it is headed, Turkey is no longer the sort of partner Germany wants to work with, they say.
The disagreement has placed German organizations working in Turkey at increased risk. Political foundations have been branded spies in the local press, and the arrest of Germans like Peter Steudtner, a human rights campaigner conducting a workshop, on charges of terrorism has jolted many foreigners working in Turkey.
Most Germans and Turks interviewed did not want to be named in an article in the current climate.
Mr. Erdogan, for his part, does not look as if he will heed such demands.
Shaken and angered by last year’s coup attempt, he has instigated a widespread purge of suspects at home and abroad that has swept up critics and political opponents as well.
In the process, 50,000 people have been jailed and 150,000 suspended from their jobs, and new arrests and suspensions continue to be announced.
Mr. Erdogan’s supporters say that the coup attempt was an attack on Turkey and that the subsequent crackdown is necessary for its survival.
Presidential aides have said that only in the months after the coup attempt has it become clear how deep was the infiltration of the Gulen movement through government institutions. The purges were necessary, and those who are not guilty will later be released or reinstated, a presidential adviser said.
Presidential aides and ministers have stepped in at times to soothe relations. Prime Minister Binali Yildirim met with German company executives to reassure them after German officials warned they could face arrest. The Turkish government conveniently awarded Siemens a major contract in Turkey’s renewable energy program at the same time.
Turks are pragmatists, Mr. Mühlbauer points out, saying, “Turks usually go for Plan B.”
