Kim Wall Is Confirmed Dead as Danish Inventor Is Investigated
COPENHAGEN — The Copenhagen police announced on Wednesday that a torso found this week in local waters was that of Kim Wall, a Swedish freelance journalist who disappeared after boarding a Danish inventor’s submarine.
The announcement, which followed DNA tests of samples from the torso, turned what had started as a missing-persons case into what Christian Jensen, editor in chief of Politiken, Denmark’s largest daily, called “the most spectacular murder case in Danish history.”
The inventor, Peter Madsen, 46, has been held on preliminary charges of involuntary manslaughter. It is not yet known how Ms. Wall, 30, died, nor how or why her body was dismembered.
Her torso — missing its arms, legs and head — was found by a cyclist on the edge of Amager Island on Monday afternoon, near where the submarine sank on Aug. 11. A postmortem examination began that night.
Mr. Madsen initially told investigators that he and Ms. Wall had gone out on the submarine, which he had designed, on the evening of Aug. 10 for an article Ms. Wall was working on, and that he had dropped her off later that night in a remote section of the port of Copenhagen.
But he later changed his story, telling investigators that Ms. Wall died accidentally on the submarine, which sank, and that he had buried her at sea.
Jens Moller, chief homicide investigator for the Copenhagen police, said at a news conference that metal had been attached to the torso to weigh it down. “We consider this a breakthrough in the investigation,” Mr. Moller said, “but we continue to search for the missing body parts.”
He also said that “coagulated blood” had been found inside Mr. Madsen’s submarine, which was recovered from a depth of about 22 feet. The police have said that they believe the submarine was deliberately sunk.
Mr. Madsen’s lawyer, Betina Hald Engmark, said after the announcement that her client “finds it positive that there is a final clarification” about the discovery of Ms. Wall’s body.
Ms. Engmark said she could not comment on the condition of Ms. Wall’s body beyond her client’s statement that he buried her at sea. “Due to the court’s closed doors, I’m not permitted to either confirm or deny reports on what happened to the body,” she said in a telephone interview.
The police said they are still looking for other parts of Ms. Wall’s body, but criminal law experts said that the evidence — which appeared damning — could already be enough to secure a conviction.
“The prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty of a crime, but there are no rules demanding certain types of evidence,” said Trine Baumbach, an associate professor of law at Copenhagen University. “It’s a very pragmatic legal system and the sum of the circumstantial evidence can be enough,” she said, noting a recent murder conviction in a case in which the victim’s body was never found.
Sentences for murder in Denmark rarely go beyond 16 years, as Scandinavian countries place a heavy emphasis on the prospects of rehabilitation.
In a statement on Facebook, Ms. Wall’s mother, Ingrid Wall, wrote: “It is with boundless sadness and shock that we received news that the remains of our daughter and sister Kim Wall have been found. We cannot yet grasp the extent of this catastrophe and there are many questions that must be answered.”
Ms. Wall — a graduate of the London School of Economics and both the Journalism School and the School of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University — had been preparing to move to Beijing with her boyfriend. She planned to write about China and the region.
“Kim joined the club having recently returned to Beijing full of passion for the stories she planned to cover here,” the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of China said in a statement. “She was a talented freelance journalist, brimming with integrity, humanity and a deep interest in China and the wider region.”
Caterina Clerici, a journalist in New York and a friend of Ms. Wall’s, said she had worked with her on articles about retired carnival workers in Florida, overweight athletes, and tourism in Haiti.
“She was always going for subcultures or foreign affairs seen through a pop culture lens, finding the odd one and doing her best to make it not look like the odd one,” Ms. Clerici said in a phone interview, adding that she could see why Ms. Wall would be interested in writing about someone like Mr. Madsen.
“What hurts me the most is that she would have portrayed him in a really fair, honest and compassionate way, trying to find common ground with this guy because that’s what she was about,” Ms. Clerici said. “It’s really hard to cope with the idea that something this horrible could happen to her next door to her home.”
Mr. Jensen, the newspaper editor, said the case had transfixed Denmark.
“It began with a crazy scientist who we thought was a victim, as his submarine disappeared accidentally with a Swedish journalist onboard,” he said in a phone interview. “Our emotions were completely turned around as he went from victim to possible perpetrator.”
Mr. Madsen had been well known in Denmark as a quirky if temperamental innovator who had worked on developing rockets and submarines. He did not have a criminal record.
The hideous discovery has elicited some comparisons in the Danish press to the television crime series “The Bridge.” The first season begins with the discovery of a mutilated female body on the bridge over the Oresund strait that connects Copenhagen with Malmo in Sweden. (Ms. Wall grew up near Malmo and died in Copenhagen harbor.)
Mr. Jensen, the editor, said the similarities were troubling and hard to ignore. “This is a story about the bright Nordic region where dark forces lurk underneath the surface of our well-kept welfare states,” he said.
But others found the comparison unseemly. The scriptwriter for “The Bridge,” Hans Rosenfeldt, wrote in an email: “I’m not at all comfortable with commenting or reflecting over real crimes in this way.”
