Trump’s Afghan Gamble Now Rests on General He Doubted
KABUL, Afghanistan — The commander in chief and his commander fighting the uphill war in Afghanistan have never met.
Even after months of delay, when President Trump convened his national security team to complete his Afghanistan strategy, the commander, Gen. John W. Nicholson Jr., was conspicuously absent.
That distance reflects a remarkable shift in America’s longest war. Mr. Trump’s predecessors overcame even the most awkward relationships for regular briefings with their field commanders.
When General Nicholson, a 61-year-old combat veteran described by peers as a “thinker warrior,” was asked at a news conference in Kabul on Thursday if he had directly briefed the president, he said: “I provide my input through the chain of command, and this system works well.”
In many ways, General Nicholson’s career has been shaped by the war. He took command in Afghanistan during the Obama administration, is on his fourth tour and even met his wife because of their shared interests in the country.
The general got most of what he had sought in the strategy announced by Mr. Trump: increases in American military trainers and air support in targeting the Taliban, without deadlines.
But Mr. Trump emphasized that he had been reluctantly persuaded to perpetuate the war, which he has described as a total disaster — not exactly a vote of confidence in General Nicholson. “My original instinct was to pull out,” Mr. Trump said. “And historically, I like following my instincts.”
Now, the task of ensuring that Mr. Trump’s gamble does not blow up in his face falls on General Nicholson, making the tightrope he has been walking even more wobbly.
The general, who had pleaded with the Obama administration not to reduce his resources, got little attention from the Trump White House for months. And just a few weeks ago, word leaked that Mr. Trump had talked of firing him — for little of his own doing. So while General Nicholson may be newly empowered, he has also been undermined in the eyes of his Afghan partners.
“I was not only surprised, I was shocked — to me it showed how Washington was detached from reality of Afghanistan, the reality of the U.S. military,” Amrullah Saleh, a former Afghan intelligence chief, said of Mr. Trump’s talk of firing General Nicholson. He called the general “a rare and exceptional personality — he stands out.”
General Nicholson is now not only the American face of the war, but also the face of American continuity for an Afghan government dealing with a new administration in Washington. A new ambassador to Kabul has yet to be confirmed.
He has described himself as the product of the United States’ post-Sept. 11 campaign in Afghanistan. In this country, more than anywhere else, personal relationships are crucial. Battles often turn as much on winning the trust and faith of local leaders as on driving out the Taliban.
“I have seen many American commanders here, but the combination of qualities that Nicholson brings — as a professional general, as a leader who understands and is comfortable with the culture here — is very rare,” said retired Gen. Sher Mohammad Karimi, the former chief of the Afghan Army, who has known General Nicholson for a decade.
“I have watched him from when he was a colonel, to now that he is a general,” General Karimi said. “Even then, like he does now, he would meet elders in Khost and in Nangarhar, for lunch, for tea, for discussions.”
Even before 9/11, General Nicholson was part of a breed of Army officers trying to bring about a sweeping transformation, shaping the force for more agile fighting.
His three tours in Afghanistan before he arrived as commander gave him extraordinary knowledge of the country. It took him from the east along the Pakistani borderlands to the Taliban hotbed in the south. At the peak of the American military surge, when President Barack Obama sharply escalated the number of troops, he served in Kabul as the deputy commanding general for operations.
Even when he was posted outside the country, his work was connected to Afghanistan. From 2009 to 2010, he was the director of the Pakistan and Afghan Coordination Cell at the Pentagon, allowing him to see how a victory in Afghanistan would be impossible if insurgents enjoyed sanctuaries across the border.
He met Norine MacDonald, a researcher who campaigned for licensing opium for medicine, at an event on Afghanistan, and they fell in love and married.
She often accompanies him on provincial trips, an unusual sight not only for Afghan leaders to see a commander with his wife, but also for American soldiers.
By the time General Nicholson was chosen in March 2016 to lead the command in Afghanistan, after a stint as the commander of NATO’s Allied Land Command in Turkey, the resources on the ground were depleted even as the threat posed by the Taliban was growing to a point that they verged on overrunning cities.
Back at home, priorities had shifted to the fight against the Islamic State. The command staff in Kabul had been radically reduced, forcing him to juggle mundane tactical decisions as well as larger questions of the war’s direction.
Much of his time since taking over the war effort has been spent between presidential reviews, essentially forcing him to put his head down and work quietly behind the scenes.
At first, he spent months trying to persuade President Obama to stop the further reduction of American forces and expand the authorities of the command by allowing them to go after the Taliban. Then, just as this year’s fighting season was starting in Afghanistan, the Trump administration began another policy review.
The general assigned his staff to study other conflicts, including Colombia’s guerrilla war and a Maoist insurgency in India, for clues that could help in a war where the United States was out of ideas. It was under his command that American forces dropped a MOAB, the biggest non-nuclear weapon in the American military.
General Nicholson has also played the role of a diplomat, and not just because the embassy has lacked an ambassador since winter. Afghanistan’s fractured politics have required constant hand holding to keep political fights from further undermining the country’s security forces.
While his predecessors were largely focused on trying to manage a relationship with former President Hamid Karzai, who increasingly challenged the American military presence, General Nicholson has a comfortable partnership with President Ashraf Ghani and his coalition partner, Abdullah Abdullah.
But the partners lack strong political support in the face of growing opposition. So the American general has stepped in, taking helicopter rides to the villa of Abdul Rab Rassoul Sayyaf, a firebrand former warlord, on the outskirts of Kabul, or having tea with other figures mobilizing against Mr. Ghani’s government. An aide to Mr. Sayyaf said his boss often described the general as “a good listener.”
“He understands he is operating in a fragmented society, and that the cohesion within the state is fragile,” said Mr. Saleh, the former Afghan intelligence chief. “The very fact that he is reaching out to various persons who matter in the political landscape shows his farsightedness.”
Much of the general’s time also is spent on encouraging, and often pressuring, the Afghan forces to reform and do more of the fighting — a must, if Mr. Trump’s new strategy is to work and if he is to get value for his dollar.
Afghan and Western officials described General Nicholson as courteous and friendly in meetings — often reminding the Afghans across the table of old battles they had fought together — but also firm. He has withheld pay for tens of thousands suspected of being fictional “ghost soldiers” until proved otherwise, and has suspended fuel contracts worth hundreds of millions of dollars because of fear of corruption.
How General Nicholson will fare under the Trump administration remains unclear. But an episode this year gave the general and his Afghan partners a taste of the president’s unpredictability.
With Mr. Trump’s review of the war well underway, General Nicholson visited Kandahar Province, the former epicenter of the Taliban insurgency, and assured local officials that the United States was committed to Afghanistan and that Mr. Trump’s yet-to-be announced strategy would show that.
But in the following months, as Mr. Trump took his time to decide, reports came out that not only had the president flirted with the idea of a complete withdrawal, but had also raised the possibility of dismissing General Nicholson — before meeting him.
While the general’s superiors, including Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, expressed full confidence in him, some damage from the seesaw messages had been done.
“He promised us the situation would not get worse, and the U.S. was here to stay,” said Sayed Jan Khakrezwal, the chief of the Kandahar provincial council. “Then after some days we heard in the media that Trump is firing General Nicholson.”
