‘Race Politics Is Back,’ but What Does That Mean? 
Tim Soutphommasane, Australia’s race discrimination commissioner, will end his five-year term this month and issued a blistering assessment on Monday of the country’s politics and its commitment to racial equality.
Here are highlights and analysis of Dr. Soutphommasane’s speech, which he delivered Monday night in western Sydney as his last public address. 
Dr. Soutphommasane, a political philosopher with a Ph.D. from Oxford University, opened his speech with a damning, if obvious, diagnosis: Race relations in Australia are getting worse. 
His comments came in response to what he later describes as a wave of offensive comments involving race, dominated by conservative commentators and politicians. 
But his speech also follows a recent burst of activity by his office that included several data-heavy reports showing the wide gap between Australia’s ethnically diverse population and the mostly white elites running government and business.
Last month, he was co-author of a report showing that Australia’s leading companies are failing to take advantage of the nation’s cultural and linguistic diversity and are losing out as a result.
Before that, he introduced an even more comprehensive look at the lack of diversity in government, large corporations and academia.
In our story about it, we quoted this key conclusion: “Although those who have non-European and Indigenous backgrounds make up an estimated 24 percent of the Australian population, such backgrounds account for only 5 percent of senior leaders.” 
Dr. Soutphommasane dived into the heated debate about Chinese influence on Australian politics by calling out Clive Hamilton, the author of a book about Chinese interference titled “Silent Invasion.” 
He went on to cite specific examples of the trickle-down impact of the discussion, including an incident involving Jenny Leong, a Greens party lawmaker in the New South Wales Parliament, who was harangued by a woman who said: “You are taking over. I know your plan. We are all now second-class citizens because you Chinese are taking over.”
[Read More: 200 years on, Chinese-Australians are still proving they belong.]
The Australian media landscape is one of the most highly concentrated in the world, and Dr. Soutphommasane is arguing that some media outlets are using racism to attract eyeballs. 
These tend to be outlets owned by Rupert Murdoch. 
Sky News Australia, a Murdoch-owned cable news channel, faced withering criticism for airing an interview with Blair Cottrell, the former leader of an anti-Islam, far-right group who has expressed pro-Nazi views. 
On Sunday, it admitted on Twitter that “it was wrong” to have done so. 
The Australian Press Council also recently received complaints after Andrew Bolt, a conservative commentator for News Corporation, wrote a column last week that described “a tidal wave of immigrants” sweeping away “what’s left of our national identity.”
Dr. Soutphommasane grew up in Fairfield, an area of Sydney that has long been the first stop for immigrant families like his own — and here he is arguing that those who fear such areas do not understand how they work. 
Within a generation, research from the United States and other countries shows, integration tends to accelerate rapidly, with many children of immigrants becoming high achievers. 
Migration scholars also point out that social cohesion requires adjustments by both newcomers and long-term residents; white majorities need to assimilate to their own changing country, too. 
Australia is filled with areas where this has already happened. Pyramid Hill, in rural Victoria, is one example. 
Carlton, the Italian area of Melbourne, and Cabramatta, where the first Vietnamese refugees settled, would also count. 
Conversations about race and crime tend to follow a historical pattern: In Australia and elsewhere, crimes committed by newly arrived immigrants or minorities tend to be attributed to problems with an entire group, rather than individual criminals.
This has been especially true for the Sudanese-Australian community, which has come under unwelcome — and some say, unwarranted — attention after Australia’s most senior politicians have pointed to its members as a cause of crime and violence in Melbourne. 
In fact, according to Victoria’s Crime Statistics Agency, criminal offenders born in Sudan make up about 1 percent of all offenders. That’s greater than their proportion of the total population in Victoria, but state figures show that is also true of Australian-born offenders (who make up almost 72 percent of criminal offenders and roughly 65 percent of the population) and New Zealanders (who are 2.2 percent of offenders and 1.6 percent of the population in Victoria).
[Read more: A wrestling team in Australia fights to prove it’s not an “African gang.”]
This is as aggressive as the generally mild-mannered Dr. Soutphommasane gets. 
Using the “snowflake” insult often deployed by the right to condemn liberal college students for their sensitivity, he called white Australians who are angry about assessments of racism weak and unwilling to confront reality.
More tough talk from Dr. Soutphommasane — especially on the point that some people are less offended by a racist act than by someone calling it what it is. 
But more broadly, what was interesting is that he spent more time in his speech calling out these kinds of individual actions than he does focusing on systems of structural racism. 
He acknowledged at one point that “prejudice and discrimination are like the permanent stains of our humanity,” but phrases like “implicit bias” or “unconscious bias” — schools of thought explaining that racist outcomes are often tied to historical and unseen influences that shape us all, regardless of background — do not appear in Dr. Soutphommasane’s speech. 
[Watch: What is implicit bias? A video explainer.]
The impression he left, after five years, is one that leans heavily on personal accountability and responsibility: He has done his job to combat racism in Australia. What will others do?
