Duterte, Philippine President, Boasts He Killed Someone as a Teenager
President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines said on Friday that he had stabbed someone to death when he was a teenager, the latest claim from a leader who has boasted of personally killing people while defending a violent crackdown on drugs.
“When I was a teenager, I had been in and out of jail, rumble here and there,” Mr. Duterte said during a speech to Filipinos in Danang, Vietnam. “At the age of 16, I already killed someone.”
He said he had stabbed the person “just over a look,” and he asked his audience in Vietnam to imagine what he could do as president.
“I won’t let you off the hook” if you mess around with Filipinos, he said. “Never mind about the human rights advocates.”
Mr. Duterte’s spokesman, Harry Roque, said the comment had been meant as a joke. Officials loyal to the president have said he has a tendency to exaggerate.
“I think it was in jest,” Mr. Roque said. “The president uses colorful language when with Pinoys overseas,” he added, referring to Filipinos.
The comments came as the leader defended his government’s brutal countrywide crackdown on drugs. His speech was met with applause and laughter.
Mr. Duterte is in Vietnam with dozens of other world leaders for the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting.
In 2015, while he was mayor of Davao City, Mr. Duterte said in an interview with Esquire that he had stabbed someone to death when he was 17 years old. In December 2016, he said that during his time as mayor, he had personally killed at least three people.
The Philippine leader has been widely criticized for an extrajudicial crackdown on drug dealers and users that has left an estimated 4,000 people dead since May 2016, according to local news outlets.
Human rights groups have condemned Mr. Duterte, saying the crackdown has allowed police officers and vigilantes to ignore due process and to take justice into their own hands.
Mr. Duterte is set to meet with President Trump on Sunday in Manila, part of the American president’s 12-day tour to several Asian nations. Mr. Trump praised Mr. Duterte this year, congratulating him on the “unbelievable job on the drug program.”
