Macron Denies Access to 2 Russian Media Outlets in French Campaign
PARIS — The campaign of the French presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron confirmed on Friday that it had denied the pro-Kremlin media outlets Sputnik and Russia Today accreditations to cover the rest of his campaign.
On Sunday, after it became clear that Mr. Macron and Marine Le Pen would face each other in the election runoff on May 7, the news media descended on Macron headquarters. But journalists from RT, Sputnik and Ruptly, a Russian video news agency, were denied access.
Other Russian media outlets were accredited for the event, according to a spokeswoman for the campaign, who said RT and Sputnik were considered “alternative media” that produce “propaganda.”
In a weekly briefing in Moscow on Thursday, a spokeswoman for the Russian Foreign Ministry, Maria V. Zakharova, described the decision as “outrageous.” She said the “prohibitive measures” were “purposeful and blatant discrimination of the Russian media by a candidate to the presidency of a state that historically stood up for freedom of speech.”
Ms. Zakharova said the decision was in line with previous “unsupported accusations against RT and Sputnik” made by the Macron campaign, and she called on the French authorities “to pay special attention to the violation of media rights in the course of the presidential elections.”
The French authorities and security experts have for months warned of the risk of election meddling by Russia, either through slanted or fake news, trumpeted by pro-Kremlin outlets, or through cyberattacks.
It may well be that Mr. Macron’s campaign has experienced all of them.
The decision to bar the Russian outlets came on the heels of a report by the cybersecurity firm Trend Micro that Russian operatives had targeted Mr. Macron’s campaign. Those operatives have also been linked to the hacking of Democratic Party officials before the presidential election in the United States last November.
In February, Richard Ferrand, the secretary general of Mr. Macron’s movement En Marche!, or Onward!, warned that the campaign’s databases and websites had been hit by “hundreds, if not thousands,” of attacks from inside Russia.
As on most subjects, Ms. Le Pen and Mr. Macron’s views on French-Russian relations differ vastly.
Ms. Le Pen, whose earlier presidential bids have been partly financed by Russian loans, has supported lifting sanctions against Moscow that were imposed after Russia’s annexation of Crimea. She also met with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia before the French election.
Mr. Macron, after some wavering, adopted the European Union’s position that sanctions could not be lifted until the Minsk agreements, which aimed to resolve the Ukraine crisis, had been fully implemented.
