Fire at Malaysian Boarding School Kills 24, Mostly Students
HONG KONG — Twenty-four people, most of them children, were killed in a fire on Thursday at an Islamic boarding school in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia’s capital, when they became trapped by a locked door and barred windows, officials said.
Fire officials said many of the bodies found in the school’s dormitory had been burned beyond recognition, but they confirmed that the remains belonged to 22 boys, ages 13 to 17, and two teachers.
“Based on our initial investigations, the position the victims were found indicated that they tried to escape through the windows but were stopped due to the fixed grills on the windows,” Datuk Soiman Jahid, a deputy director general with the fire department, told reporters at the scene.
The fire broke out Thursday morning on the top floor of the three-story school, Tahfiz Darul Ittifaqiyah, where students are taught to memorize the Quran. The local news media broadcast images of charred bunk beds, and on social media, users shared photographs of covered bodies being unloaded at a morgue.
“Bodies being brought into the morgue. Just when you think they’re going to stop unloading the van, more brought out,” Sumisha Naidu, a correspondent for Channel News Asia, said in a Twitter post.
Firefighters arrived at the school around 5:40 a.m. and heard boys screaming for help from inside the barricaded dormitory, Mr. Soiman said. He said 13 bodies had been found in a pile in one corner of the dorm, possibly indicating a stampede toward the exit.
“I saw their little hands out of the grilled windows, crying for help,” a neighbor, Nurhayati Abdul Halim, told the local news media. “I heard their screams and cries but I could not do anything. The fire was too strong for me to do anything.”
Fourteen other students and four teachers were rescued, but their conditions were unknown.
Malaysian politicians, including Prime Minister Najib Razak, offered their condolences via Twitter.
Religious schools in Malaysia, a majority Muslim country, are not subject to routine government inspection.
According to The Star newspaper, 211 fires have been recorded nationwide at private Quran schools, or tahfiz, since 2015.
The fire on Thursday was reminiscent of a 1989 blaze in which 27 girls were killed at an Islamic school in Kedah State.
