Two Australias? Readers Tell Their Stories
I spent a few days with the federal budget process in Canberra this week but rather than making comparisons to Washington D.C. — or sharing which American politicians I’d love to see endure an hour of Question Time, which is tempting — I figured I’d turn this issue over to readers.
Many of you emailed us about my last newsletter, sharing your own experiences with race and class in Australia and the divide that I described in Sydney, or arguing I had it all wrong.
Some readers (Clancy McDowell, Vlaho Stef) pointed out that there are not two Australias but rather three — Indigenous Australia being the third. A few of you also made clear (correctly, of course) that even three was too far limited.
“There are an infinite number of Australias, just like there are multiple ‘USAs,’” Erica Potts wrote.
A few readers resisted the idea that the divide was racial in any way; in their view, wealth created cultural distance, nothing more. But others told me they identified with what I’d observed.
“Your piece on the two faces of Australia really struck a chord,” Aparna Balakumar wrote. “As someone born in Australia to Indian migrants who arrived with $20 in their pockets thirty years ago, I’ve never been assumed ‘Australian’ by a stranger in my life. And yet, that is how I define myself.”
Hilary Webster pointed me to a more uplifting example — the school where she teaches in Bankstown, a southwestern Sydney suburb.
“We have students from Arabic-speaking countries (Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Iran), Asia (Indonesia, Malaysia, Vietnam, China, Thailand), Pacific Islands (Samoa, Fiji) and various African countries, as well as two students recently arrived from Greece and one Aboriginal student,” she wrote. “These children are Australia’s future, and their aspirational parents all want them to be successful Aussies.” (I already asked Hilary if I can come visit.)
Finally, there was one reader in particular who seemed to pull together all of these threads into something memorable and contemplative. I often tell people that New York Times readers are among the world’s most engaged thinkers, so Meggie Morris, thanks for providing evidence.
Below you can see what she wrote, in full, followed by my weekly roundup of Times stories, and a recommendation — this week, it comes from Peter Carey, one of Australia’s favorite novelists.
______
I was born in Hong Kong to white Australian parents and lived in Taiwan as well before settling in regional Australia, where I grew up. I headed to Sydney at 18 to study music, and then overseas to the U.S. to embark on graduate studies. So, I guess, I’ve experienced the “Australian identity” from myriad angles, all of them admittedly privileged by the colour of my skin.
While I was living in Washington DC, I had an interaction that I’ll never forget. I was drinking with friends when two American men and a woman heard my accent and came over to talk to me. I was stoked to chat about my home country, a place I really love. But not five minutes into our conversation, which started with the usual back-and-forth about spiders and snakes, one of the men pulled this out of nowhere: Abbos, right, they’re lower than dogs.
I was shocked. I lectured them about using derogatory words and phrases like that. I told them that I have immediate family members who are Indigenous. Given America’s own complicated past and present, I asked them how they thought that was an acceptable thing to even think, let alone say out loud. And then I asked them where they learnt that sentence. The man’s answer was what rocked me the most.
“An Aussie couple from Sydney passing through,” he said with a shrug.
We have a complicated relationship with race. We have a complicated relationship with colonialism. We have a complicated relationship with classism. Never was this more obvious to me than at 2am in a muggy, dark bar on the other side of the world.
—
The further you go from our own capital cities, the more complicated it gets. In regional towns that have lost Australian workers to the pull of Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane, immigrants having been filling rosters for years. These are towns that people in bigger cities often immediately pass off as racist, uneducated holes not worth a visit. And I tell Sydneysiders who laugh at the fact that my home town only has one traffic light about a local restaurant owned by a transgender Thai woman. And I tell them that my observations about race in Sydney, although different, are also far from perfect.
Before I went to the U.S., I worked five jobs to save money. Three waitressing jobs, a music teaching position and as a hotel maid. It was behind these doors where first generation Nigerian-Australians, white kids from Mosmon and international students from China all worked together, serving mostly Sydney’s white elite.
—
Our entire country struggles differently with our various identities, no matter where we are. We have a complicated relationship with race. We have a complicated relationship with colonialism. We have a complicated relationship with classism. And I think any Australian who isn’t ready to admit that doesn’t have a true love for country, something we pride ourselves on.
True love for country isn’t unconditional or blind, it’s knowing that we can do better and actively trying to improve. Of course, I don’t want every young Australian to have some stranger repeat a racist phrase to them in a foreign bar, but I do think we all need to step back, to take a more comprehensive and realistic look at our home. And from looking at my friends around the country, I know more and more of us are doing just that, whether they’re in Alice Springs, Armidale or Annandale.
— Meggie Morris
______
You can (and should) read Dionne Searcey writing about the dozens of Nigerian girls released from Boko Haram after years in captivity. But I got even more out of hearing her on “The Daily” podcast talking about what pushes women in Nigeria toward and away from one of Africa’s most notorious bands of Islamic extremists. It’s an example of how empathy serves storytelling.
______
No no no no no no. There I said it. And you should too. Here’s why. You can tell your boss The New York Times said it’s OK.
______
Mike Wilson is both a gentleman and one of our most astute chroniclers of life in New York City. He also helps saves lives on subway platforms.
______
While the United States and Australia tighten immigration policy, Canada seems to be reaping rewards for its more open approach in the form of new technology development. Since Donald Trump was elected, applications to Canada for student and temporary visas have surged.
______
Peter Carey, the novelist who wrote “True History of the Kelly Gang,” called me a few weeks ago with a story idea he wanted to pass on. I was drinking my morning coffee in Sydney, he was cooking dinner in New York, and as we got to talking about what we’d each learned about our adopted countries, I asked him if he could recommend a book that helped him understand the United States.
He laughed a bit. The unassuming mischief in his voice reminded me of another great writer and teacher, Frank McCourt, whom I’d interviewed a while back after he published “Angela’s Ashes,” and I expected Peter to cite some novel by some other illustrious Irish-American.
Instead he threw me further back in time. “Tocqueville,” he said.
“Democracy in America,” Alexis de Tocqueville’s seminal work of American exploration — foreign correspondence, really — was published in 1835. Peter said that what is often overlooked in the book is de Tocqueville’s concerns about the vulnerability of America’s political system. It points directly, he said, to the rise of a Donald Trump.
And this week, as the world tries to make sense of Donald Trump’s decision to fire James Comey, the head of the F.B.I., it may be worth revisiting.
