SÃO PAULO, Brazil — Giovanni Bright didn’t dare chat with his neighbors in the elevator when he bought his apartment 31 years ago.
“You didn’t know who was standing next to you,” he said. “There were drug dealers on the top floors, and some of the apartments were just flop houses for local prostitutes.”
But it was cheap, just $18,000 for a two-bedroom flat near his job in downtown São Paulo. And he was buying a slice of Brazil’s cultural heritage — in the colossal Edifício Copan designed by the celebrated architect Oscar Niemeyer in the 1950s.
“At first I thought it was a bit of a disaster,” said Mr. Bright, a professional magician who raises doves in his laundry room and has turned one of his bedrooms over to his collection of tuxedos, costumes and memorabilia. “But you can’t help falling in love with its beauty and its power.”
He certainly doesn’t regret the decision now. His apartment is valued at nearly a quarter of a million dollars.
The prostitutes and drug dealers were gradually replaced by artists, students and wealthy entrepreneurs attracted by the idea of living in an iconic building. That transformation has, in turn, fueled a revival of an area of Brazil’s most populous city that was once feared and avoided but now draws visitors to its cutting-edge galleries, skate parks and trendy restaurants.
The elegant building, whose imposing wave shape mirrors the tilde above the “a” in São Paulo, is arguably the signature achievement in the city for Niemeyer, an architect best known for designing the modernist capital, Brasília, from scratch.
It is home to about 5,000 residents in apartments ranging from cubbyhole studios to sprawling penthouses. With 72 stores and restaurants on the ground floor, it was given its own ZIP code and declared the biggest residential building in Latin America — a city within a city.
Yet there were problems from the start. Niemeyer’s original design, which included an adjacent hotel, was never fully executed. The developers ran out of money and sold the project to a bank before construction was finished.
The first tenants moved into the Copan in 1962, but by the end of that decade, paulistanos, as the city’s residents are known, were beginning to flee to the suburbs.
“It was a long era of decline,” said Affonso Celso Prazeres de Oliveira, a chemical engineer who bought an apartment in the building in the early 1960s and became the Copan’s administrator in 1993.
Many abandoned buildings in São Paulo’s downtown were taken over by homeless squatters during that time, while drug addicts pitched tents in the streets and once-elegant parks. Edifício Copan was not immune to the decay. “The 1980s was the worst period,” Mr. de Oliveira said.
Mr. de Oliveira, known as the Copan’s “mayor,” is widely credited with the building’s turnaround.
One of his first acts was to evict prostitutes and ban illegal drug sales; tenants who refused to comply with rules were fined and threatened with eviction. He had security cameras and new elevators installed and fixed the decaying garage.
Homeowners were thrilled with the new hard line and have repeatedly voted to extend his term.
Mr. de Oliveira also went to the open-air crack dens that had spread into nearby streets and convinced the addicts to keep a certain distance from the Copan. This allowed him to avoid erecting the multiple layers of gates and guards that block the entrance to the vast majority of São Paulo’s residential buildings.
Those efforts were complemented by public investments in security, pedestrian areas, bicycle lanes and cultural initiatives during Brazil’s boom period at the turn of the century. These days, keeping owners and tenants in the building is no longer a challenge.
Among them is Rodrigo Cerviño Lopez, an architect who moved into one of the biggerapartments 15 years ago and helped convert a large abandoned area of the Copan into Pivô, a gallery and art space.
In his own 16th-floor apartment, he tore out walls and opened up spaces to take full advantage of the city views and the cross-breeze that result from Niemeyer’s innovative facade. Horizontal ledges of concrete known as brise-soleil wrap around the Copan’s front face and keep apartments shaded despite floor-to-ceiling windows, and also give the huge building a graceful look.
“The design works,” Mr. Cerviño Lopez said. “You’re not allowed to mess with the facade, but you wouldn’t want to. It’s like built-in air-conditioning.”
Entrepreneurs have accelerated the gentrification.
In 2008, Janaina Rueda opened the trendy Bar da Dona Onça in what had been a shuttered store on the Copan’s ground floor. When the bar took off, she and her husband, the renowned chef Jefferson Rueda, moved into an apartment in the building with their two children.
“Copan is ground zero for the revitalization of the center,” Mr. Rueda said of São Paulo’s downtown.
He even gave up his job at a Michelin-starred restaurant in one of São Paulo’s wealthiest neighborhoods and invested in his own restaurant, A Casa do Porco, two blocks from the Copan.
The restaurant’s lines are out the door every day, even though it opened in 2015, when Brazil entered its worst recession on record.
“Here, there’s no crisis,” Mr. Rueda said of the gentrified downtown area.
Not everyone is so sure. Paula Lacerda, who leads walking tours through downtown São Paulo, said the financial crisis had led to fewer cultural options and more crime.
She warns her groups about “bicycle gangs” that specialize in grab-and-run robberies. Theft of mobile phones in the city has increased 40 percent in the past two years, according to police figures, and most of it happens downtown and in the new pedestrian areas.
“If things get worse,” she said, “I think the center could be abandoned again.”
At the Copan, only half a dozen apartments sit empty, the smallest number since Mr. de Oliveira took over its administration. But he says the recession has hurt.
A huge net was strung over the building’s facade two years ago to protect passers-by from falling tiles. Mr. de Oliveira had also hoped to attract advertising on the front of the Copan, an architectural monument that attracts hundreds of visitors each day, but so far he has not been successful.
“Budgets are tight these days,” he said, which means that refurbishments that were scheduled to last three years could take longer.
“Now, we’re at an exceptional moment,” Mr. de Oliveira said. “Which doesn’t mean our work is done.”
