‘Somewhere in Australia,’ Explained
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter reflecting the experience (and quirks) of our Australia bureau chief, a Yank who’s convinced he has the best job in journalism. Sign up to get it by email and forward it to friends if you get the urge.
______
Digging through The New York Times’s archives to learn more about Guadalcanal for a story on the Solomon Islands, I started to notice an interesting dateline that kept coming up: “Somewhere in Australia.”
When I searched for the phrase in our TimesMachine archive, it turned up 235 results.
A few of the stories just happened to have that line in the text, but mostly it was a dateline on stories from Australia during World War II.
“Somewhere in Australia” essentially meant “somewhere with the United States military in Australia, but we can’t say where for security reasons.”
Many of the articles seemed aimed at projecting wartime confidence (“Raid on Philippines Thrills Our Fliers” declared one headline from April 18, 1942), but there were also stories about big battles, heroism and a lack of supplies, along with the occasional dispatch about how American and Australian soldiers were trying to connect and collaborate.
These last little stories brought to life the Australian-American alliance on a human scale. They also revealed the fruits of simple curiosity, the way journalists try to make sense of their world and share the results.
These stories were among my favorites.
Language, not surprisingly, was clearly of interest to correspondents then, as it is now.
There was this small story from May 11, 1942, for example, explaining how “hot stuff coming” became a catchphrase signaling the approach of American troops.
Another story from July 25 of the same year noted that American soldiers were “greatly interested in the peculiar speech of those Australian aborigines who used pidgin English.” It then cited a written report from a tracker named Turtle — possibly the first time an Indigenous Australian was quoted in The New York Times.
A few months later, on a Sunday in January of 1943, The Times also ran a short item that amounted to a glossary of Australian slang.
“Australian slang is virtually a language apart and American soldiers who ran into it in its most concentrated form were quite baffled for a time,” it read. “Now they are getting the hang of it and even the Yanks are saying everything is ‘dinkum.’”
Some of the slang identified then is still around today — like “cobber,” which means “buddy” — but does anyone still stay “curling the moe,” which apparently meant “everything going along at its best”?
I’m pretty sure “triddlybit” (threepence piece) is out of fashion, too.
All of these stories erred on the side of light, making them a good entry point, but the thing about historical research is that you never know what you’ll find. And in addition to these, I also discovered the story of Byron Darnton.
He was among the first New York Times correspondents sent to Australia in 1942, and he was killed while reporting near what is now Papua New Guinea.
He was also the father of John Darnton, another revered correspondent for The Times, who is now retired but still runs the New York Times Journeys that take readers on educational tours all over the world.
I had recently connected with John when a tour group came through Australia, so I sent him an email Thursday morning.
I’m not sure what I was looking for, but I think I wanted to know more about what his father had written (many stories lacked bylines back then) so I could better imagine him here in Australia and traveling through the region.
I wanted a line back in time and forward, eager to see farther by standing “on the shoulders of giants,” as Isaac Newton once wrote, referring to what he learned from Descartes.
John wrote back right away.
“Thanks for your intriguing email,” he said. “Yes, my father was killed as a war correspondent in the Pacific theater in Oct., 1942.”
He explained that he had been young, only 11 months old at the time, but that he later explored his father’s life in a book called “Almost a Family.”
Turns out his father spent several months in Australia “mostly fighting the censors who protected Gen. Douglas MacArthur and censored anything that indicated, truthfully, that he was far from the front.”
While the United States military was eager to have stories about “Allied troops,” John said, Byron Darnton, who went by Barney, always wrote and fought for the use of “Australian troops.”
He also wrote a lot of stories about Aussie soldiers — including that story above about the slang they used.
His death came as a shock to the entire foreign press corps.
A story in the archives dated Oct. 22, 1942, quoted other correspondents lamenting the loss — including a Sydney Morning Herald writer who praised Barney’s “unfailing good humor” and suggested that he was to be buried in a military cemetery in Port Moresby.
John later did his own reporting, uncovering previously unknown details.
I wondered if John had gone back to the area — and he had. He went to a village near where the accident occurred, interviewing two tribal elders.
John ended his email simply — “Hope this helps, Damien.”
It did.
Sometimes it’s easy to forget that journalism is a profession of connection, of people in conversation across boundaries of power, time and distant “somewheres.” Sometimes a look to the past can shed light on how close history can be, reminding us all that small moments and words still matter.
Now here are this week’s examples. As always, share your thoughts by email at nytaustralia@nytimes.com or in our NYT Australia Facebook group — and share this newsletter if you like it.
______
In 2015, McKinsey & Company (the “godfather of management consulting”) took on a risky contract with a flailing, state-owned South African power company — lured by the potential reward of $700 million.
It was the company’s biggest mistake in its nine-decade history.
______
I loved “The Corrections,” and have followed Jonathan Franzen’s angst for years. Now he’s moved to California and seems content, but can you really remove yourself from public feedback without withdrawing from life?
Taffy Brodesser-Akner tries to figure that out in this highly readable and acutely observant profile of the author for The New York Times Magazine.
She also vows not to go birding with Jonathan Franzen. Then she of course goes birding with Jonathan Franzen.
______
As Sri Lanka’s president sank the country deeper and deeper into debt over his ambitious port project, Chinese allies continued to hand out loans and assistance, even when other lenders refused.
When the debt became crushing, the Sri Lankan government handed the port over to China.
This case is one of many in which China has used loans to gain influence — and played hardball to collect.
______
• Parliament passed sweeping security legislation Thursday to combat foreign interference in Australian politics. Some experts say it’s long overdue given China’s recent efforts, but others told us the law is a giveaway to security agencies seeking more power and secrecy.
• On a related note, a dozen Australian politicians enjoyed lavish overseas trips courtesy of the Chinese technology company Huawei, a new report says. Huawei is also under scrutiny over concerns about spying and security.
• Amelia Lester writes for Opinion about Australia’s dark lesson on immigration: the dehumanization of immigrant families can be an effective political strategy.
• Daisy Kadibil, a Martu woman who as a child in the early 1930s trekked 800 miles home after being forcibly removed from her family, has died at 95. Her journey inspired the film “Rabbit-Proof Fence.”
• Why shouldn’t breakfast chefs get accolades, too? Our restaurant critic Besha Rodell reviews Babajan, a cafe in Melbourne that shines brightest at breakfast.
• An Australian reader poetically laments the trappings of modern life — from our false sense of connectedness to avo toast — in this week’s Australia Diary. Nicely done and worth a read.
• And from New Zealand: Even after qualifying for it, thousands of people in New Zealand still must wait for public housing, sometimes for months or years. Social workers say the country’s homeless population increasingly includes people with jobs.
• It’s a girl! Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand became the first world leader in nearly three decades to give birth while in office.
• Who would have thought moths had such a good sense of direction? Researchers studying the Australian bogong moth say they have found the first reliable evidence that insects can use Earth’s magnetic field for navigation.
• And while the World Cup dream is over for Australia, it only gets more exciting from here. Sign up for the Offsides newsletter to stay on top of the action, see what it will take for teams to advance, and don’t forget to play Spot the Ball!
______
Via Tacey Rychter, our audience editor, who also helped select the stories above:
“Nanette,” the Australian comedian Hannah Gadsby’s heart-wrenching “comedy” special on Netflix. The comedy is in quotation marks because — as Gadsby demonstrates as she unravels during her one-hour performance — there’s such a brittle line between comedy and despair. Essential, game-changing stuff.
A postscript: I’ll be off for the next two weeks. See you in mid-July!
