CARACAS, Venezuela — Odebrecht, the Brazilian construction giant that ran a vast bribery scheme in the Americas, made campaign contributions to numerous Venezuelan candidates, including Diosdado Cabello, one of the country’s most powerful politicians, according to a video released on Saturday by Venezuela’s ousted attorney general.
The video, showing an excerpt from a deposition by the former head of Odebrecht’s Venezuelan operations, widened allegations of the firm’s involvement in Venezuelan politics.
The former attorney general, Luisa Ortega, who fled the country in August, posted an earlier video, on Thursday, in which the same Odebrecht executive, Euzenando Prazeres de Azevedo, testified that the company had paid President Nicolás Maduro at least $35 million in bribes in 2013 linked to campaign promises.
Since her ouster by Mr. Maduro, Ms. Ortega has been releasing evidence of alleged corruption in Venezuela’s government. The latest video, published on Ms. Ortega’s blog, came on the eve of gubernatorial elections in Venezuela and seemed timed to influence the vote.
In the video, Mr. Azevedo said that from 2004 to 2013, Odebrecht became extensively involved not only in federal elections but also in municipal and state contests.
Venezuelan law forbids foreign companies from contributing to Venezuelan political campaigns
“We were always looking to contribute to these campaigns, and we contributed to many of them, specifically in those states and the municipalities where we had projects,” he said. “The objective that we had was basically to facilitate municipal or state bureaucratic procedures.”
Local and regional governments, he said, could ease red tape for the firm in ways big and small, including issuing environmental permits or closing streets.
Mr. Azevedo said the company contributed to Mr. Cabello’s unsuccessful campaign for governor of Miranda State in 2008. Mr. Cabello is now a top official of the nation’s governing party and is among Mr. Maduro’s closest allies.
According to Mr. Azevedo, other leading politicians who received Odebrecht contributions during gubernatorial campaigns included: Gian Carlo Di Martino Tarquinio, currently the Venezuelan consul general in Milan, who made an unsuccessful run in Zulia State in 2008; Elías Jaua, a former vice president and former head of the Agriculture and Lands Ministry, who lost a bid in Miranda in 2012; and Pablo Pérez, an opposition politician whose 2012 re-election bid in Zulia ended in defeat.
Mr. Azevedo did not detail Odebrecht’s total contributions to local and state candidates in Venezuela.
Mr. Cabello and the other politicians named in the video issued no immediate comment on Saturday regarding the video, which was made last year by Brazilian authorities investigating the Odebrecht scandal. A senior Brazilian law enforcement official confirmed the authenticity of the video.
In April, a federal judge in Brooklyn ordered Odebrecht to pay $2.6 billion in fines as part of a plea agreement between the company and the governments of the United States, Brazil and Switzerland in connection with a bribery scheme involving $800 million in payoffs.
The allegations made in the video on Saturday were not as explicit as those made in Thursday’s excerpt. In the earlier video, Mr. Azevedo said he was “asked for a large sum” in 2013 by a representative of Mr. Maduro, who at the time was running for the presidency.
“He asked for 50, and I accepted to pay him 35 million,” Mr. Azevedo said.
Vladimir Aras, a Brazilian prosecutor who until recently led the attorney general’s international cooperation office, said this week that the Brazilian authorities shared deposition videos with Ms. Ortega this year after they became convinced she would try to prosecute suspects in Venezuela.
