Chinese Legal Maverick, Facing Political Gales, Bides His Time
BEIJING — These are quiet but fretful days for He Weifang, who has spent two decades at the forefront of struggles for the rule of law in China. He may be China’s best known law professor; he is also, in many ways, persona non grata in his country.
Universities where students once thronged to hear his lectures cannot invite him. Newspapers that regularly published his columns and lionized him as a trailblazer cannot mention him. Frustrated by censors, he has mostly given up trying to speak out on China’s internet, where his dormant Weibo social media account still has nearly 1.9 million followers.
“It’s even become hard to publish papers in academic journals,” Mr. He said with a half-bemused shake of his head in a bookstore cafe near Peking University, where he has taught for 23 years. “The past five years have been really, really stifling.”
Mr. He (pronounced “her”) is among the most prominent of the liberal Chinese intellectuals who find themselves huddled down in a political gale. Under President Xi Jinping, the unyielding Communist Party leader, China has turned sharply against the advocates of political pluralism and legal limits on party power.
Instead, Mr. Xi has reasserted the party’s sweeping supremacy. In March, the legislature removed a two-term limit on the presidency, paving the way to a generation of unchallenged rule. Mr. He said that even he was stunned by the boldness of the constitutional changes.
“I didn’t expect them to be so impatient and swift,” he said of the changes, including the expansion of an  anticorruption agency that can detain officials beyond the reach of courts and lawyers. “The authority of the pre-existing national legal system has been greatly weakened.”
Some of Mr. He’s friends and at least one of his former students have been imprisoned for their political and legal advocacy; other scholars have retreated into silence or moved overseas. Some once like-minded academics now praise Mr. Xi’s authoritarian ways. A global tide of authoritarian sentiment has also emboldened Mr. He’s critics inside China.
But Mr. He, 57, said life had taught him to take a longer view of the country’s political evolution. His career has followed the twisted path of Chinese liberal reformist hopes over four decades, from the optimistic ferment of the 1980s to the reversals that have accelerated into an avalanche under Mr. Xi.
“Recent developments in China have delivered a big wake-up call to Chinese liberals that nothing will come easily,” he said.
Even while banished from the Chinese news media, Mr. He commands a warm following among students and lawyers. He is still allowed to teach foreign legal history and comparative law at Peking University, which he said is more tolerant of mavericks than many other Chinese campuses.
While he was being interviewed for this article, a student waited patiently to shake his hand. During another interview, editors at a law publisher greeted him as an old friend.
“He’s a public intellectual and has a big following, but of course it’s suppressed now,” said Eva Pils, a law scholar at King’s College London who studies Chinese human rights lawyers and has known Mr. He for about 15 years. “But I think he sees himself in a longer historical trajectory as one of those Chinese scholars who spoke up whatever the consequences.”
China’s tradition of liberal dissent burst out of hiding in the late 1970s, when the nation was recovering from the upheavals of Mao Zedong’s final years. For Mr. He, the scars from that time were deeply felt.
He was born in Shandong Province in eastern China, where his father, He Chuanyou, was a doctor who had once worked in the military. But the father was engulfed in the mass persecutions of the Cultural Revolution, and in 1970 he killed himself by severing the arteries in his legs, Professor He said.
These memories swelled 10 years ago, when Bo Xilai, an ambitious politician, began reviving Mao-era songs and rhetoric in Chongqing, a city in southwest China. Mr. He issued an open letter in 2011 denouncing Mr. Bo’s red revivalism, and he was jubilant when Mr. Bo fell in a scandal the following year. But dangerous nostalgia for Mao’s time persisted, Mr. He said.
“When I was young, a wall at the front of our home was covered with big-character posters accusing my father of being an ideological reactionary,” he said in an interview. “I realized that the Cultural Revolution was a tragedy that must never be allowed to happen again.”
In 1978, Mr. He won a coveted place in higher education, after Deng Xiaoping, the reformist party leader, revived competitive entrance exams. He had aspired to study Chinese literature and become a journalist or writer. Unexpectedly, he was sent to study law in Chongqing.
It was there, at 18, that he was thrown into the ferment of ideas released by Deng’s liberalizations, when ideas of rule of law and democratic accountability began to circulate. “It was an optimistic era,” he said. “There was a feeling that Chinese society was slowly thawing.”
Mr. He became intrigued by how Western ideas like the rule of law had emerged in the Middle Ages, and he went on to study legal history in Beijing. Back then, it was easier to envision the Communist Party evolving into a more open form of government. He joined the party in 1984, and remains a member.
“At that time, it didn’t feel like you had to make a choice between the party and democracy, because party leaders seemed to be heading in the right direction,” he said. “There was no unbridgeable gulf between the party and the intellectuals.”
But in the late 1980s, as Deng and other leaders recoiled from political relaxation, students and liberal academics demanded faster change. Student protesters occupied Tiananmen Square in Beijing in 1989, and Mr. He joined the hubbub.
On June 4 that year, a friend banged on his dormitory door to say that soldiers had shot their way into the city. Mr. He said he had seen five corpses in pools of blood on the grounds of the college where he was staying.
For many Chinese intellectuals, the years that followed were a time for rethinking. Outright transformation of China’s one-party system seemed out of reach. Mr. He and other law experts began to discuss how to encourage progress within limits, especially through measures to promote legal judicial independence and by spreading ideas of legal rights.
“Our assumption was that we didn’t have to touch other major parts of political reform,” he said. “We could make progress here, because it wasn’t so ideological.”
Mr. He emerged in the 1990s as one of China’s most articulate proponents of this legal approach. In 2003, he backed a successful campaign, whose leaders included two former students, to ban the detention and expulsion of migrants moving into Chinese cities who were accused of not having the right permits. The case became a landmark in Chinese hopes of using the law to promote political change.
“Back then, no other law scholar played such an important role in disseminating liberal ideas,” Teng Biao, a former student of Mr. He’s who led that campaign, said by telephone from New Jersey, where he lives. “His most important characteristic was his speeches everywhere across the country — he’s a powerful speaker, humorous and very popular.”
But even before Mr. Xi’s rise, Chinese leaders were worried by this surge of legal activism. In 2006, Mr. He gave a blunt speech to a closed door conference in Beijing, castigating the Communist Party for sitting outside the law. His comments leaked onto the internet, drawing denunciations and official pressure.
Since Mr. Xi came to power in 2012, the pressure on Mr. He and other wayward intellectuals has deepened. But he said he was prepared to wait until he would be allowed to roam the country again, giving talks.
At a dinner with friends late last year, he recited “We Are Wooden People,” a poem by a Beijing writer that he said distilled the spirit of the times. (A full translation of the poem is here).
“We are wooden people, forbidden to speak, not allowed to laugh, not even permitted to move,” Mr. He read out. “If I am to die, I will die on the path to my humanity.”
