In Palo Alto Co-op, a Microcosm of Modern Mexico City History
MEXICO CITY — At dusk, lights in the office towers that loom over the rows of two-story houses in the Palo Alto housing cooperative cast an alien glow on the families gathered outside — to exchange the day’s news, buy an ice cream, kick a ball.
At lunchtime, the office workers descend by elevator and climb a few dozen paces to the arch at Palo Alto’s entrance, strolling through the streets to the family-run lunchrooms.
New towers with guarded homes and offices are planned on the co-op community’s southern edge over the soccer field. They will wedge the tiny settlement in so thoroughly as to make it an afterthought in the relentless spread of Mexico City’s urban sprawl.
“The wish that we cease to exist has always been latent,” said Gloria Valdespino, 66, a retired teacher who has always lived in Palo Alto.
The community’s origins and the threats to its future offer a capsule account of Mexico City’s modern history.
It began with rural migrants who converged on the capital’s outskirts in the 1930s in search of work, earning barely enough to stave off hunger, and evolved into their struggle for housing during a heady time of social organizing in the 1960s and 1970s.
“Palo Alto is an emblematic case of the fight for the right to the city,” said Enrique Ortiz, the architect who led the design of the community. “It’s a right for everybody, not just those who can pay for it.”
But Mexico’s adoption of a rigid version of market economics in the 1990s and the city’s lack of urban planning allowed developers to set the terms of the capital’s expansion toward the mountains on its western edge.
More than 40 years after Palo Alto was founded, its 11.5 acres are home to as many as 2,000 people who live in gaily painted houses that fill tidy streets leading to a small plaza, a church and a community center.
Years of conflict, though, have left scars. The community is in a legal limbo, its founders growing old. Some houses are abandoned and crumbling, and empty lots that had been set aside to build new housing for young families are littered with debris. In the background, once again, are developers, hinting at the prospect of big money, a temptation that divides the working-class community.
There is also the worry that a younger generation will lose Palo Alto’s sense of solidarity. “The majority of the children of the members are in a comfort zone,” said one of them, Fabiola Cabrera, 33. “We never had to fight, to scratch out a living.”
She and her husband, Luis Márquez, 35, a lawyer, are leading an effort to revitalize a new generation of the co-op.
“We are all owners of the same thing,” said Mr. Márquez, who has taken on the legal fight and has ambitious plans to build on the empty lots and establish iron and carpentry workshops for residents. “It’s an alternative to the idea of private property.”
Palo Alto’s roots date to 1940, when families from the countryside arrived to work in a sand quarry and built shacks on the site, paying rent to its owner. Some people even lived in caves blasted from the quarry by dynamite.
“We were poor but there was no envy of anything,” said Artemio Ortega, 68, recalling his patched clothes and the sandals his father made from old tires.
His childhood memories are also suffused with the migrants’ rural traditions, including a taste for pulque, a pungent drink fermented from agave sap. “The vice of pulque was rooted in him,” Mr. Ortega said of his father.
Mr. Ortega left school after second grade to work. His wife, Carmen Campos, 59, one of eight children, began working as a maid at 12. Today, the couple run a busy lunchroom.
The government closed the quarry in 1969 and its owner ordered the workers and their families to leave, expecting to sell the property as part of the upscale suburb Bosques de las Lomas.
But the families were helped by wealthy parents whose daughters attended a nearby convent that had opened a primary school for the workers’ children. Several parents had the ear of leading city officials.
At the same time, an activist priest, the Rev. Rodolfo Escamilla, infused with liberation theology, began to organize the community as a co-op.
He was murdered in 1977; his killers were never found. A mural of the priest adorns a wall in Palo Alto, which celebrates his birthday every year.
After two years of negotiations with the authorities and a face-off with the landowner — whose claim was tenuous, Mr. Ortiz said — the city seized the land.
One summer night, Caratina García, then a mother with two young children, and a few other women stood up to the police who had been sent by the quarry’s owner. “They threw tear gas, but even then they couldn’t remove us,” said Ms. García, now 67. “They never came back.”
“We had the right” to the land, Ms. García said. “We had been paying rent all along.” Somewhere in her tidy room she still has all those rent receipts.
In 1973, the Palo Alto co-op took possession of the property, agreeing to pay 1 percent of what land was selling for in the neighboring suburb.
“Escamilla said everybody was a leader, but the women were the ones who carried out a large part of the process,” Mr. Ortiz said.
But in the 1970s, women had few legal rights, and all but a few of the co-op’s 247 founding members were men. Some signed the founding document with only a thumbprint.
Co-op ownership would provide a bulwark against real estate speculation, Father Escamilla reasoned. All decisions were made in a weekly meeting of all members.
With possession of the land assured, Mr. Ortiz led a team of idealistic planners and architects who designed a self-contained community with the same road leading in and out of Palo Alto, to fend off speculators trying to chip around the edges.
Each house had the same layout, with options to expand as families grew. With little money to pay construction workers, Mr. Ortiz designed brick and ceramic building panels that women and children could make. Houses went up over the next several years, and the community was established.
In the 1990s, as development began on the towers of the Arcos Bosques office complex next to Palo Alto, the co-op rejected an offer to sell.
The co-op remains a small town with soccer matches on Sunday and events in the plaza. Streets are safe.
“What really stands out is how it’s possible to live in such a capitalist city with such a good quality of life without having much income,” said Virginia Negro, who is writing a doctoral thesis on Palo Alto.
Two decades ago, about 40 co-op members demanded the right to sell their property. The dissidents, as they are known, sued, creating a conflict that persists today.
A 2015 court ruling guaranteed Palo Alto’s residents the right to their housing. But they must buy out the dissidents, at a cost Mr. Márquez estimated at more than $1 million.
Most of those who grew up in Palo Alto and emerged from its poverty treasure the co-op. As dusk fell across his lunchroom Mr. Ortega finished his story. But Ms. Campos had the last word.
“The story of Palo Alto is a pearl,” she said, “and somebody has to polish it more.”
