   The Seagrams liquor heiress charged with harassing and intimidating victims of an Albany sex cult won’t be getting close to them anytime soon. 
   Clare Bronfman, who’s been shacked up in a one-bedroom apartment in Manhattan since she was placed under house arrest on Jul. 24 — a far cry from her 3-mile-long private island in Fiji — is charged with conspiracy and criminal racketeering for her role in the corrupt carnal cabal, NXIVM. 
   The 39-year-old appeared in Brooklyn Federal Court on Wednesday with an eerily placid expression as her attorney asked a judge to ease up on the stringent conditions of her house arrest. 
   Citing “draconian restrictions,” Bronfman’s lawyer Susan Necheles argued prosecutors are depriving Bronfman of her livelihood by forbidding contact with NXIVM-connected friends and coworkers, such as her accountant, charging the government is trying to “isolate her and to push people into cooperating against her.” 
   Assistant U.S. Attorney Moira Penza said prosecutors have tried to narrow the definition of who Bronfman can and can’t talk to, but Bronfman’s legal team refuse to play ball. 
   “This is a criminal enterprise. There are unindicted co-conspirators,” Penza said, adding that Bronfman may try to use her enormous wealth to intimidate potential witnesses if given the opportunity. “This is not some high in the sky proposal of the government.” 
   Bronfman, the youngest daughter of billionaire philanthropist Edgar Bronfman Sr., is charged with harassing victims of the cult through various methods — threatening aggressive litigation for noncompliance or to those who tried to leave the commune, sometimes following through — among a myriad of related charges. 
   Brooklyn Federal Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis told Bronfman’s attorney he would consider easing up if she presented him with case law to support her arguments, but ultimately sided with federal prosecutors. 
   He granted Bronfman three 90-minute breaks in the week to leave her apartment to go jogging or meet friends not connected to the sex cult. 
   “Ms. Bronfman has, because of her wealth and because of her status, a lot more (influence) over people than garden variety defendants in the Eastern District,” the judge said. “If she wants to hang out, the answer is no.” 
   Asked whether she understood the restrictions imposed, Bronfman replied, “Yes, your honor.” 
   Following the proceeding, the defendant’s lawyer told reporters she is confident Bronfman will be acquitted. 
   “If you notice in the indictment, there are only three things she’s alleged to have done wrong,” Necheles said. “They have nothing to do with NXIVM.” 
   Bronfman is due back in court on Sept. 13.   
