Drawn to a Cause, British Woman Dies Fighting Alongside Kurds in Syria
LONDON — Many young people leading safe, comfortable lives in the West take up causes like the environment or gender equality. Fewer devote themselves to the plight of Kurds in Syria’s brutal civil war. Fewer still travel there to join the fighting, and those who do are usually men.
But Anna Campbell, a young woman from southern England, did all of that. Last week, as the Turkish military and its Syrian rebel allies hammered their way into Afrin, in northwestern Syria, Ms. Campbell died for her commitment — the eighth Briton and the first British woman to be killed fighting alongside Kurdish forces.
In Britain, Ms. Campbell, 26, was active in causes like animal rights and environmental protection, but until recently, she had no personal connection to the Kurds. Yet she was deeply moved, family and friends said, by the fight to defend an autonomous, mostly Kurdish region in northern Syria, known as Rojava, whose leaders advocate a secular, democratic and egalitarian politics, with equal rights for women.
“She was somebody who saw the injustices of the world and the plight of the weak and vulnerable and disempowered, and she also saw the idealism, the amazing utopian vision of Rojava, and she found those two elements irresistible,” her father, Dirk Campbell, said in an interview. “She wanted to prevent that from being stamped out, which Turkey and Syria are trying to do.”
The Free Syrian Army, a rebel group, and Turkey declared on Sunday that they had taken control of Afrin, a mostly Kurdish city near the Turkish border that had been held by the People’s Protection Units, the Kurdish-led militia known by the initials of its Kurdish name, Y.P.G. The Kurds appeared to have withdrawn, but the Y.P.G. claimed in a statement that the fight was not over, and that it had only shifted “from direct confrontation war to hit-and-run tactics.”
Ms. Campbell, whose mother died several years ago, grew up in East Sussex, in southeastern England. She studied at Sheffield University, but academics did not suit her, her father said, and she dropped out, worked as a blacksmith and trained as a plumber.
She traveled to Syria last year, received military and Kurdish-language training, and joined the Women’s Protection Units, or Y.P.J., the all-female military forces that fight alongside the Y.P.G. She dyed her blond hair black, to blend in better, and took a Kurdish name.
“I wanted to participate in the revolution of women that is being built up here and fight, and join also the weaponized fight against the forces of fascism and the enemies of the revolution,” she said in a vi
