Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
The cottages where we stayed last weekend in the Blue Mountains are well known for attracting friendly kangaroos. But in the parking lot, there were also signs warning us not to feed them.
So what were we to do when we saw a family, who appeared to be immigrants or tourists from India based on their accents, tossing slices of white bread to the hopping herd?
My 7-year-old daughter, a roo lover supreme, wanted to tell them to stop, but my wife and I found ourselves resisting. “No, no,” we told her as she ran toward them, “leave them be.”
Was that the right call? Or were we shirking our civic duty?
For a nation settled by convicts, Australians can be sticklers for the rules. I think of this every time I see people waiting for the “walk” sign at crosswalks where cars are nowhere to be seen, or when I interact with officials in Canberra or civil servants in New South Wales, who tend to insist that the way they do things is the only way they could ever be done, ever, anywhere.
Isn’t this also one of the lessons of “The Castle”? The idea that Australians who try to follow the rules are meant to be honored?
But here’s the challenge that rule-following Australia now finds itself confronting: What’s to be done with those who have a different experience, say in countries where rules are more negotiable, or those who simply want a less rigid society and more, well, encouragement of difference?
Our ethical conundrum was relatively minor (kangaroos have survived far worse than white bread), but there are bigger issues afoot that are testing Australia’s sense of when to hold the line and when to live and let live.
With same-sex marriage, for example, Australians are deciding whether the old rules of relationships should still be enforced, or loosened. The debate isn’t just about competing arguments of freedom or fairness, or about what the word marriage should really mean; it’s also about whether or not to change how Australians interact with each other.
That question affects immigration too. The elevation of rules restricting access drives the refugee policy that led to the detention centers on Manus and Nauru. It’s also what lets the country’s leaders pat each other on the back for Australia’s “multicultural society” even as they work to add additional rules that make it harder to obtain citizenship, and insist that immigrants exhibit “Australian values,” which mean just about anything that the establishment deems important.
Indeed, I’m often struck by the gap between white Australians who insist everyone is welcomed in Australia — no hyphenated identities here! — and the experience of immigrants or the children of immigrants who tell me the many ways they are treated as “other” and made to feel that their differences are unwelcome.
This is hardly unique to Australia; immigrants and expanding ideas of sexuality and gender are challenging societal norms all over the world. And yet what’s so interesting about the current moment in Australia are the ways that these forces — those defending the status quo, and challenging it — are colliding.
The postal plebiscite for gay marriage has already been answered by nearly 60 percent of eligible Australians, far surpassing expectations. The debate over Australia’s refugee policies regularly brings out both supporters and critics, while outside the gaze of the Australian establishment, immigrant communities in places like Fairfield, one of Sydney’s most diverse western suburbs, are creating their own versions of “Australian values” every day.
Where, I often wonder, will Australia be in five or 10 years on its adherence to rules, and on these issues of sexuality and gender, and race and immigration?
With trust in government and media sharply declining in the country, will Australia become a messier or a more rigid democracy, with more bending of the rules or more conflict? Or will new compromises emerge?
At our cottages, my daughter found her own middle ground. When offered a slice of bread to feed the kangaroos, she declined, but without comment. She did not defend the rules to those who may not have seen the signs (they had walked in from another area), nor did she violate the rules herself.
Maybe, just maybe, there’s something to be learned in that?
Tell me what you think about Australia and its rule-following at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
What examples do you see in your own lives, or what ethical quandaries have you faced, that might help explain where Australia is heading?
If you’re a subscriber, join us in our private, engaging and always-rollicking Facebook group for additional discussion. And share this newsletter if you have friends who might be interested.
Now, here are our favorite stories from the past week, about Australia and not, followed by a recommendation.
______
The mass shooting in Las Vegas has once again brought tears, outrage and debates about American gun culture into our daily lives.
This roundup will guide you through arguments from the right and left about gun control. You can get a better sense of the shooter’s hotel room with help from our graphics team. And in just a few minutes on Hack on J, I tried to explain the connection between Americans and their guns — no easy task.
______
We often write about China and its role in Australia, but this week we dove into the case of a New Zealand lawmaker accused of being a spy for China, and what it says about China’s reach.
You also won’t want to miss our story about a Brisbane theater company that may or may not have “whitewashed” Lin-Manuel Miranda’s big musical hit before “Hamilton”; or our take on Elon Musk’s rocket announcement in South Australia; or this analysis of what the newly proposed media law could mean for Rupert Murdoch. And don’t miss this genre-bending article from the magazine’s culture issue about the Necks.
Hailing from Sydney, could they be ”the greatest trio on earth?”
______
With Amazon about to open in Australia (I’ll have a story on that soon), it’s interesting to see the European Union trying to crack down and collect what it sees as unpaid taxes from big American tech companies, including the Jeff Bezos behemoth. This is a battle likely to kick up all over the world, including Australia.
______
• Thomas Friedman explores how different the response would have been if the Las Vegas shooter had been a Muslim.
• David Brooks crafts a philosophical argument against Trumpism that he says Republicans should embrace: “The core American idea is not the fortress, it’s the frontier.”
• Lisa Pryor, discussing Australia’s same-sex marriage dispute, would like to point out that “one particular family arrangement does appear to have a slight advantage when it comes to raising children. Of course I am speaking about lesbian parenting, which multiple studies have shown confers certain advantages on children.”
Isabella Kwai suggests that we all give a listen to “Kind World” — a podcast from WBUR in Boston about people who have had their lives changed by small acts of kindness.
The segments are short, just a few minutes each, and will inject a touch of inspiration into your routine.
“It’s a great way to start the day,” Bella says, “to arrive at work seeing the good in the world.”
