   Gun violence, natural disasters and potential terrorist attacks top the list of reasons why some countries are urging their citizens to think carefully before traveling to the U.S. 
   In the wake of Sunday night's Route 91 Harvest Festival attack in Las Vegas and the multitude of hurricanes that ravaged Gulf States like Texas and Florida and U.S. territories Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, some foreign countries are warning their citizens of traveling to the States for the foreseeable future. The Vegas Strip shooting left at least 58 people dead and more than 500 injured and in Puerto Rico, at least 34 people were killed by Hurricane Maria and, as of Tuesday, 95% of the island still did not have power. 
   The German government recently updated its travel safety page to include the Las Vegas attack and hurricane damage but also lists "frequent political demonstrations" and "politically motivated violence" as reasons to be vigilant while traveling. Under a section labeled "crime," the German government notes that "In the U.S. it is comparatively easy to get possession of weapons," and, "If you become a victim of an armed attack, do not try to defend yourself!" 
   The United Kingdom's foreign travel advice page says that terrorists are "very likely to try to carry out attacks in the USA," and that citizens should avoid the city of Las Vegas since the attack. It also has a note about travel to Florida, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands that reads, the "post-storm situation remains dangerous, with extreme flooding, power outages, and limited communications." 
   America's neighbor to the north, Canada, is currently advising Canadians to "avoid non-essential travel to the Florida Keys and Naples due to damage caused by Hurricane Irma." 
   The Irish Department of Foreign Affairs site says that "there is an increased threat of terrorism and extremist violence worldwide" and that "the USA has also witnessed a number of mass shootings in recent years," both of which Irish citizens should bear in mind. 
   In Australia, the government is also saying that it's still unsafe to travel to the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico in the wake of Hurricanes Maria and Irma but its general safety tips makes a point that "The United states has more violent crime than Australia" and that "Mass shootings continue to occur in public places." 
   This is not the first time foreign nations have advised their citizens from coming to America. Just last year, New Zealand, France, Germany and other countries issued warnings about traveling to the U.S., citing the Zika virus, gun violence and anti-LGBTQ sentiments, according to Condé Nast Traveler. In March, the Independent reported that Nigeria was warning its citizens against traveling here amid the uncertainty immediately surrounding President Trump's immigration ban.   
