200 Reindeer Starved to Death. Experts Call It a Sign of Climate Change.
LONDON — Two hundred reindeer died of starvation last winter on a remote Arctic archipelago, researchers in Norway reported, highlighting what they said were the effects of climate change on vulnerable ecosystems.
The archipelago, Svalbard, lies between the Norwegian mainland and the North Pole and is made up mostly of undisturbed natural landscapes, with its own subspecies of reindeer. The Norwegian Polar Institute has been surveying the reindeer there since 1978. According to the institute, this winter was the deadliest for the animals since a similarly fatal season in 2007-08.
Ashild Onvik Pedersen, a terrestrial ecologist at the institute, said on Wednesday that climate change had increased the frequency and amount of rain in the high Arctic. Heavy winter rains had then turned to ice, preventing reindeer from reaching their usual vegetation.
“Once you get the rain on the top of the snow, most often it completely freezes to solid ice that completely covers the plants,” she said.
Climate change has also made for warmer and longer summers in Svalbard, helping to increase the reindeer populations. That leads to greater competition among the animals for limited food resources, putting them at greater risk of starvation.
Estimates for Norway’s total reindeer population are around 220,000. Reindeer herding is a way of life for the Sami, an indigenous people of fewer than 140,000 who inhabit mostly the northern reaches of Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia. The total Svalbard reindeer population is not known, according to the Norwegian Arctic Institute, but monitoring of certain areas has shown an exponential rise in the number of animals. In one valley, their number grew from 400 to 1,200 between 1979 and 2013.
Svalbard reindeer, unlike their cousins elsewhere, do not live in herds and tend to be stationary, Ms. Pedersen said. Using GPS signals, researchers found that the reindeer have been venturing far from their normal grazing areas. They have descend
