Ukrainians Vote, in Europe’s Only Country at War
Under a campaign billboard for President Petro O. Poroshenko declaring “there are many candidates but one president,” Ukrainians picked through the meager selection — instant coffee, canned milk, bananas — on sale at a makeshift sidewalk stand in Kiev, emblematic of the country’s economic hardship.
Ukraine plans to hold an election on Sunday that will be the first genuinely contested presidential vote since street protests five years ago evolved into a revolution that deposed a widely despised, Russian-aligned leader.
Ukrainians will vote in a country divided between east and west, between corruption and a desire for honest government, between struggling, ordinary people and an ultra-wealthy business oligarchy.
[For more stories about the experiences and costs of war, sign up for the weekly At War newsletter.]
Even by the standards of former Soviet societies, Ukraine is a country of chronic pain, where people suffer from the dysfunction of their leaders, losses in war, and poverty. It is also a country with living, vibrant politics.
On the five-year anniversary of the uprising — known as the Maidan protests — as families tended to the graves of those killed by snipers on Maidan square in central Kiev, Ukrainians were less thankful for their new leaders than for the freedom to vote them out of power, polls showed.
“What is happening in our country doesn’t suit us patriots,” said Viktor Lomonos, a 52-old civic activist who took part in the uprising.
Today, Mr. Lomonos is in many ways typical of the Ukrainians who stomped and chanted on the square for months, drawing the world’s attention — only to discover, after they won, that they disliked the new leader, too.
Mr. Poroshenko, a billionaire chocolate company owner, backed the protests and was easily elected president in a snap vote in 2014, just three months after the uprising. Now he has support from only about 16 percent of voters.
Mr. Lomonos said that deeper connections to the European Union and NATO are the only way to guarantee Ukraine’s future. The same view animated the protests that toppled a government, but five years later, he is unimpressed with the results.
“If there were no war, we would definitely revolt again, 100 percent,” Mr. Lomonos said, this time against Mr. Poroshenko.
The war in eastern Ukraine looms over the election as the issue most concerning voters. Russian-backed separatists who asserted that the new leaders in Kiev were fascists revolted soon after Russia seized the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine in March 2014.
Though mostly out of the news, the conflict has smoldered as a bloody stalemate. It is both a regional war and a violent expression of the broader conflict between Russia and the West, including the Kremlin’s efforts to influence Western elections.
In the east, along a front that hasn’t moved in years as politicians hash out failed peace deals, soldiers live and fight in a landscape of mud and sandbags, waging an anachronistic trench war resembling the conditions of the First World War.
“I felt like someone came into my home, walking with dirty boots, telling me what to do, and saying ‘we want your apartment,’” Diana Berg, a former resident of the eastern city of Donetsk, said of being driven from her home by war.
Ms. Berg, one of the country’s nearly 1.5 million internally displaced people, turned person
