37 Years Later, Israel Recovers Body of Soldier Killed in Lebanon War
JERUSALEM — The remains of an Israeli soldier who went missing nearly 37 years ago in a calamitous battle with Syrian forces in Lebanon have been repatriated, the Israeli military said Wednesday, healing a long-festering wound to the national psyche and handing Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu a unifying achievement just six days before he seeks re-election.
The soldier, Sgt. First Class Zachary Baumel, a 21-year-old tank driver who was born in Brooklyn, emigrated to Israel with his family in 1970. He was lost and believed killed a few days into the 1982 Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon, in the chaos after his brigade was ambushed near the village of Sultan Yakoub, in the eastern Bekaa Valley.
Israel’s military and intelligence services never stopped searching for him, and two others who remain missing. One key breakthrough came in 1993, during the Oslo peace talks, when half of an identification tag belonging to Sergeant Baumel was delivered by Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, to an emissary of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
In 2016, Russia returned to Israel, at Mr. Netanyahu’s request, a tank that had been seized in the Sultan Yakoub battle, sent by Syria to Moscow and kept on display at the armored corps museum there.
Last year, a Syrian-based Palestinian official told The Associated Press that insurgents had found the remains of three Israeli soldiers, including Sergeant Baumel, in a cemetery in the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp in Damascus, the Syrian capital. And in the fall, Russia said its soldiers had come under fire while helping Israel search graves in Syrian territory controlled by Islamic State forces.
Mr. Netanyahu, who a day earlier had announced plans to meet with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Thursday, said Israel had “invested immense efforts” in what he called the “moral duty” of resolving what had happened to Sergeant Baumel.
“In his last words, written on a postcard before leaving for the battle of Sultan Yakoub, he wrote, ‘Don’t worry, everything is all right, but it doesn’t seem like I’ll be coming home soon,’” Mr. Netanyahu said in a televised announcement Wednesday evening.
“It took the state of Israel 37 years to bring him home,” he continued. “The operation to return Zachary Baumel back home is an example of the camaraderie that defines us as a nation, as an army and as a state.”
For Israeli Jews, nearly all of whom enter the military at 18, the recovery of a fallen soldier or the return of a prisoner of war can be a galvanizing national event. In 2011, Mr. Netanyahu released 1,027 Palestinian prisoners to retrieve one missing soldier held by Hamas, Gilad Shalit.
And the prime minister has faced fierce criticism over his policy toward Gaza from the family of Lt. Hadar Goldin, who was believed killed during the 2014 Gaza war by Hamas militants, who still hold his remains. Hamas is also believed to be holding the remains of another soldier, Staff Sgt. Oron Shaul, from the 2014 war, as well as two Israeli civilians who are believed to be alive.
“It’s something Israelis get excited about,” said Amos Harel, a military analyst for the newspaper Haaretz. “You have to bring them home. It’s a terribly emotional and ideological issue.”
Mr. Harel noted that the Goldin family had publicly expressed fear that their campaign to recover their son’s remains would suffer the same fate as the search for the three soldiers lost at Sultan Yakoub, two of whom remain missing.
Indeed, Tzur Goldin, Lieutenant Goldin’s twin brother, assailed Mr. Netanyahu after the announcement about Sergeant Baumel. “Hadar is not overseas or in a faraway country,” he wrote on Twitter.
“It is very clear where he is. He is an hour away from Netanyahu’s office” in Israel’s military headquarters, he said, “held by a loathsome terror organization that is making a fool of a terrified government that follows a failing policy. Shame on you!”
Still, for Mr. Netanyahu, the closing of such an old case could not have been more propitiously timed. He has run an exceptionally divisive re-election campaign, pitting Jews against Arab citizens and his fellow conservatives against the left, but the return of Sergeant Baumel’s remains for burial in Israel gave him a victory that could be savored by nearly every voter who has served in the military or has a relative who did.
Moreover, with Mr. Netanyahu in a tight race with Benny Gantz, a retired three-star general and army chief, anything that reminds voters of the prime minister’s competence and devotion as Israel’s commander in chief would help counteract Mr. Gantz’s appeal as a lifelong military man.
Finally, Mr. Netanyahu’s announcement came an hour before — and completely buried in the Israeli news media — a news conference at which Ehud Barak, a former prime minister and army chief, and several other retired senior military, national security, intelligence and diplomatic officials attacked Mr. Netanyahu. Their remarks came in response to a brewing scandal involving Mr. Netanyahu’s approval of the sale of advanced German-made submarines to Egypt.
The battle of Sultan Yakoub was a disastrous start to what became a disastrous military adventure for Israel in Lebanon. Sergeant Baumel’s brigade entered a narrow valley unaware that a Syrian armored division was positioned in the surrounding hills.
Survivors told of bedlam as eight tanks were abandoned and soldiers fled on foot. A rescue mission was mounted, and about 20 Israeli soldiers were killed. One of the captured tanks was paraded through the streets of Damascus.
Yehuda Katz, a gunner in one tank, went missing. In another, Sergeant Baumel, the driver, and Sgt. First Class Tzvi Feldman, a loader and communications operator, were lost, the army said. Two other soldiers who were captured and the remains of one who was killed were returned to Israel by 1985.
Eventually, Israel concluded that Palestinians in Syria were holding the other missing at the direction of the P.L.O., which the Israeli army said undertook a “protracted effort of concealment and deception” that impeded the search for years.
At an army ceremony on Wednesday, the chief of staff of the Israel Defense Forces, Lt. Gen. Aviv Kochavi, spoke of the “great obligation” he bears “to take care of every soldier” who swears allegiance to the state. “This commitment is to every family that entrusts us with them, and a commitment to Israeli society who puts their trust in us,” he said.
