Global Executions Fall 31 Percent, Driven by Iran, Report Finds
The number of executions around the world fell by about a third in 2018, reaching the lowest level in at least a decade as several countries scaled back or abolished the death penalty, Amnesty International said in a report released on Wednesday.
The global decline was driven largely by Iran, where executions were halved because of legal reforms that included eliminating the death penalty for a number of drug-related crimes.
“The trend points toward a world ridding itself of the death penalty,” said Oluwatosin Popoola, Amnesty International’s adviser on the death penalty.
Over all, at least 690 people were executed last year, compared with 993 the year before, the organization said. Despite the reforms, Iran still executed more than 250 people last year, second only to China. Iran was followed by Saudi Arabia, Vietnam and Iraq in executions.
Critically, though, the report’s headline figure omits the thousands of estimated annual executions carried out by China, which Amnesty International calls “the world’s top executioner.” The group stopped providing estimates for China a decade ago, after the government there began misrepresenting the numbers, which are only minimum estimates.
The country-by-country figures, published annually by Amnesty International since 2008, are based on what the group can reasonably confirm through official and informal sources. Some countries, such as China, consider death sentences to be a state secret, while little information can be gathered on others that are too restrictive or marred by conflict, such as North Korea or Syria.
While even repressive governments like Iran’s have taken steps to reduce death sentences, executions still rose, albeit in small numbers, in Belarus, Japan, Singapore, South Sudan and the United States.
In the United States, 25 people were executed last year, slightly up from the year before. Executions in the country peaked in 1999, when 98 people were put to death, according to the Death Penalty Information Center.
In Sri Lanka, President Maithripala Sirisena announced plans to resurrect the death penalty after a 40-year moratorium, while Thailand carried out its first execution in a decade.
Amnesty International also expressed concern about an increase in death sentences in some countries. In Iraq, for example, the number of people sentenced to death last year quadrupled to 271. In Egypt, 717 were sentenced to death last year, compared with 402 the year before.
Still, the group found that the death penalty is generally on the decline, with a growing number of countries limiting its use or banning it outright, as Gambia and Malaysia announced last year. By the end of last year, 142 countries had abolished the death penalty by law or in practice.
