North Korea Lets 2 Malaysians Leave Country
BANGKOK — Two Malaysian workers with the United Nations World Food Program were allowed to leave North Korea on Thursday, two days after the unpredictable Pyongyang government barred all Malaysians from leaving the country.
With their departure, nine Malaysian embassy workers and family members remain in North Korea as the countries wrangle over the assassination of Kim Jong-nam, the half brother of North Korea’s ruler, who was killed last month in Malaysia’s largest airport.
Prime Minister Najib Razak said that those nine remained safe and were continuing with their daily routines. The two countries will negotiate privately to end their diplomatic standoff over the killing, he said.
“Our strong focus on resolving this issue will not change,” he said in a statement. “I pledge that the government will do everything possible to ensure that our citizens continue to be safe and will be able to return to Malaysia.”
Mr. Kim was killed Feb. 13, when two women, one Indonesian and one Vietnamese, smeared toxic liquid on his face, the police say. The women have been arrested and charged with murder. An autopsy found that Mr. Kim was poisoned with VX nerve agent, a banned chemical weapon. The Malaysian police are seeking seven North Koreans, including a diplomat assigned to the embassy.
North Korea, accusing Malaysia of collaborating with its enemies, has challenged the police findings and suggested that Mr. Kim, 46, died of heart failure. The countries have expelled each other’s ambassadors and barred each other’s citizens from leaving. There are about 1,000 North Koreans in Malaysia.
Yiwen Zhang, a spokeswoman for the World Food Program in Beijing, said the two Malaysian workers arrived at the city’s airport safely on Thursday. She would not discuss details of their detention but pointed out that they had been working in North Korea as international representatives, not for Malaysia’s government, and should not be bound by the North’s travel restrictions.
“The staff members are international civil servants and not representatives of their national government,” she said.
In a Twitter post, Mr. Najib welcomed their release and identified them as Stella Lim and Nyanaprakash Muniandy.
Mr. Najib said in his statement that Malaysia would not sever diplomatic relations with North Korea, saying that the countries should continue to communicate directly.
“This is a sensitive issue,” he said. “Therefore, the government has decided that all negotiations and discussions will be conducted behind closed doors.”
He suggested that Malaysian officials were uncertain about what North Korea was hoping to accomplish by insulting Malaysia, criticizing its police investigation and detaining its citizens.
“As of now, I can only disclose that the government is in the process of establishing the reasons and motives behind the actions” of North Korea, he said.
Until Monday, Malaysia had allowed North Koreans to enter the country without a visa. For now, Mr. Najib said, Malaysia will continue to ban North Koreans from leaving.
“We will not relent from our firm approach,” he said.
Under the Vienna Convention of 1961, which governs the conduct of diplomatic relations, a host country cannot detain a foreign diplomat. Both Malaysia and North Korea are signatories to the pact. In 1979, in one of the most egregious violations of the convention, a group of Iranian students seized 52 Americans, most of them diplomats, at the Tehran embassy and held them for 444 days.
