Fueling the Hong Kong Protests  A World of Pop-Culture Memes
HONG KONG — A Broadway anthem. A Bruce Lee quote. Nods to John Lennon and Quentin Tarantino.
Legions of anti-government protesters have filled Hong Kong’s streets this summer, in the territory’s worst political crisis since Britain returned it to China in 1997. But even as tensions rise, protesters are being motivated in the streets (and on social media) by exuberant memes, slogans, songs and artwork.
Like Hong Kong itself, the movement’s aural and visual iconography channels a wide range of Asian and Western influences. Here’s a look at some of the creative expressions and pop-culture inspirations that are propelling demonstrators through a hot, contentious summer.
Protesters have released slick videos that promote their cause while paying homage to the Japanese anime film tradition, which often features surreal imagery and biting social commentary.
In one popular video, young demonstrators march in their signature uniform — yellow helmets and face masks — as one carries a yellow umbrella, a symbol of the protest movement since 2014, when demonstrators blocked major streets in Hong Kong to demand more democratic elections.
“No matter how difficult the road ahead is, we will keep walking forward together,” a solemn narrator says.
In another video, a narrator reads out the protesters’ five main demands — including Chief Executive Carrie Lam’s resignation and full withdrawal of a bill that would allow extradition to mainland China — over a furious drumbeat, against a backdrop of street clashes.
The clip’s cinematography evokes the aesthetic of popular anime, including “Cowboy Bebop,” a series by the director Shinichiro Watanabe in which characters fight for justice in a lawless universe.
Hollywood references infuse many of the slogans and memes coursing through the protests.
One popular slogan — “If we burn, you burn with us” — is a defiant line delivered by Jennifer Lawrence’s character in the “Hunger Games” movies, based on the dystopian young-adult novels by Suzanne Collins.
Another, “Ideas don’t die,” appeared on a poster commemorating a demonstrator who died this summer, alongside an image of the rain jacket the man was wearing when he fell from a building.
That phrase seems to refer to a line in the 2005 film “V for Vendetta,” in which a masked avenger battling a totalitarian regime utters the line, “Ideas are bulletproof.”
Another protest poster that has circulated online shows Mrs. Lam’s head superimposed over the body of the actress Uma Thurman, star of Quentin Tarantino’s “Kill Bill” martial-arts films.
In this case, the “bill” in question is not a person, but Mrs. Lam’s extradition legislation, which was the initial trigger for the protests. Mrs. Lam has suspended the bill and said it was “dead,” but she has stopped short of formally withdrawing it, as protesters have demanded.
A recurring visual feature of the protests has been the so-called Lennon Walls, where people have posted hundreds or even thousands of slogans — mostly on Post-it notes — in public spaces across the city.
Their name comes from a wall in Prague where tributes to John Lennon appeared after the former Beatle’s murder in 1980. It evolved into a place where young Czechs expressed support for democracy and aired grievances against the Communist regime ruling Czechoslovakia.
During the 2014 protests in Hong Kong, demonstrators created their own Lennon Wall, papering a wall near the legislative building with slogans. And this summer, the walls seem to have sprouted everywhere, galaxies of Post-its denouncing the police, calling for more democracy and expressing frustration with Mrs. Lam. Some of the displays have been torn down by people who oppose the protests, but they keep springing back up.
“Come together, leave together,” read one Post-it note in Chinese — evoking a Beatles song, though perhaps not deliberately. “No retraction, no retreat.”
During street clashes with riot police this summer, some protesters have encouraged each other by shouting the phrase “Be water” (or spreading it on Twitter).
That’s a reference to a famous line uttered by Bruce Lee, the late actor and martial-arts icon from Hong Kong, in a 1971 episode of the American television series “Longstreet.”
In Chinese Taoism, water represents power and flexibility in the face of obstacles. “Water can flow, or creep, or drip, or crash,” Mr. Lee said. “Be water, my friend.” Many protesters see the line as a symbol of their civil disobedience, permeating Hong Kong society as water flows over a stone.
Some of the demonstrators who swarmed the Hong Kong legislative building earlier this summer sang renditions of “Sing Hallelujah to the Lord,” a 1974 hymn by the American composer Linda Stassen.
The choice partly reflects how Hong Kong’s Christians, about one in nine of the city’s 7.5 million people, tend to be active in its pro-democracy movement.
It’s also a canny strategic choice: Since mass demonstrations in Hong Kong require pre-emptive police approval, some protesters sing hymns because religious assemblies — which are not subject to the same rules — are harder for the police to justify breaking up.
Another popular refrain this summer has been the chorus of “Do You Hear the People Sing?” from the Broadway musical “Les Misérables” (which was adapted from the 1862 novel by Victor Hugo).
In the play, and a 2012 film starring Anne Hathaway and Hugh Jackman, “Do you hear the people sing?” is an anti-establishment rallying cry for demonstrators in 19th-century France.
But on a recent evening in Hong Kong, Harold Tsai, a protester who was playing the song from a speaker toward a nearby police barricade, said that not all officers seemed to view the song as an antagonistic gesture.
“Some of them sing it,” Mr. Tsai, 28, added. “I see their mouths moving.”
