British Man Pleads Guilty to Sending ‘Punish a Muslim Day’ Letters
LONDON — A British man arrested this summer on suspicion of sending racist letters across England urging a “Punish a Muslim Day” and offering points for acts of violence has pleaded guilty to soliciting murder and 13 other offenses.
The man, David Parnham, 35, of Lincoln, England, entered his plea on Friday at the Central Criminal Court in London. Mr. Parnham, who local reports said worked for the Lincoln City Council, had waged a two-year campaign of terror since 2016, the police said, sending “malicious” letters and “highly offensive” packages to scores of people and organizations.
The letters and packages, some with suspicious white substances, were sent to mosques, Muslim members of Parliament and Queen Elizabeth, among others. The letters urged people to commit violence against Muslims to earn an escalating number of points.
The letter said that people would be awarded for harming Muslims on April 3 for a series of offenses — 25 points for pulling off a woman’s head scarf, 500 points for murdering a Muslim, 1,000 for bombing a mosque and 2,500 for a nuclear attack on Mecca.
According to the BBC, Mr. Parnham was caught because his DNA and fingerprints were recovered from some of the letters, including one sent to Dylann Roof, the white supremacist on death row for massacring nine black churchgoers in Charleston, S.C., in 2015.
Sajid Javid, now the British home secretary, was among those who received a letter in March. At the time, Mr. Javid was the housing secretary in Prime Minister Theresa May’s government.
British officials in the Palace of Whitehall, where Parliament meets, received packages — some containing a sticky irritant — and some offices were evacuated and sealed off. The substance was later found not to be harmful. But the mailings shook up communities, and the Metropolitan Police of London warned Britons to be vigilant.
Counterterrorism officials, assisted by the Lincolnshire Police, arrested Mr. Parnham in June, the police said in an emailed statement. He was detained after a raid at his home and at offices in Lincoln, The Lincolnite news site reported.
On Friday, Mr. Parnham pleaded guilty to a raft of charges, including five counts of staging hoaxes involving noxious substances, a charge tied to an antiterrorism act; seven counts of “sending letters with intent to cause distress or anxiety;” one count of staging a bomb hoax; and one count of “soliciting to murder.”
A 2017 post at the University of Sheffield by Mr. Parnham urged attacks on ethnic minorities and allegedly claimed that he would donate 100 pounds, about $130, to charity for each killing, the BBC reported. Prosecutors said the letters amounted to soliciting murder, and, after his plea, he faces a life sentence, the BBC said.
“The abusive, racist and threatening language used in the letters has caused major distress,” Detective Chief Superintendent Martin Snowden, the head of counterterrorism in the northeast of England, said in a statement.
“Many Muslim communities strongly believed there was a real threat to their safety which understandably caused fear, offense and worry,” he added.
Mr. Parnham will be held in jail until next month, when he will be sentenced.
Some of the letters included a picture of a person being decapitated with a sword bearing a swastika insignia, according to local news reports. In a letter sent to former Prime Minister David Cameron, Mr. Parnham wrote, “Allah is Great.”
Some communities in Britain began campaigns to counter the letters, with initiatives such as Protect a Muslim Day.
But the letters spread to the United States via social media. They spurred the police and local officials to announce increased security measure or to urge vigilance.
“Our message must be just as loud,” Eric Adams, the borough president of Brooklyn, New York, was quoted as saying by Newsweek in April. “Not punish a Muslim, let’s embrace a Muslim, let’s embrace a Christian, let’s embrace a person of Jewish faith, let’s embrace the diversity that this city has to offer.”
The latest British government statistics showed that more than 80,000 hate crime offenses were reported in 2016-17, and that hate crimes based on religion had risen 35 percent compared with the previous year.
In February, Darren Osborne, 48, was found guilty of murder for driving a van into Muslim worshipers outside the Finsbury Park Mosque, in North London, in June 2017, killing one person and wounding nine others.
The trial raised questions about the radicalizing influence of far-right groups in Britain, especially after Mr. Osborne admitted that he had also hoped to kill Jeremy Corbyn, leader of the opposition Labour Party, as well as the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, at a different location.
In July, Mr. Javid, the home secretary, announced more funding for specialist police training to identify and respond to hate crimes.
