Mets offense goes off in rout of Marlins following miserable rain delay
   If only the Mets bats woke up like this once in a while for Jacob deGrom, there would be no NL Cy Young debate. 
   The Mets exploded for more runs than they’ve scored for their ace in his last five outings to coast to a 13-0 rout of Miami following a near six-hour rain delay. 
   The teams were set to play a single-admission doubleheader Wednesday to make up Monday's rainout, but the nightcap was pushed to Thursday. They now will play two games beginning at 3:10 p.m. to conclude a four-game series. 
   Zack Wheeler (11-7) tossed one-hit ball into the seventh and allowed four hits over eight innings. Paul Sewald got the final out at 12:15 a.m. 
   Jay Bruce hit a grand slam, Jeff McNeil had three hits and Amed Rosario and Dominic Smith each homered for the Mets, rewarding the several hundred rain-soaked fans who stuck around to watch a matchup between NL East laggards. 
   Most waited out the delay in the stadium's covered areas, pouring back beer or coffee to pass the time. A handful of fans along the first-base line chanted "Let's play ball!" to the tune of "Let's go Mets!" On the suite level, others napped on couches. 
   The Mets closed a number of concession stands, and some stadium personnel were dismissed hours before the first pitch. 
   It could've been worse. The White Sox and Rangers were delayed in Chicago for 7 1/2 hours on Aug. 13, 1990, though it's unclear if that was the longest delay in major league history. That game was finally postponed around 9 p.m. 
   The Marlins seemed sluggish from the start, and the Mets poured it on. Smith scored on Jose Reyes' second-inning double after relay man Starlin Castro held the ball, apparently unaware that Smith had just rounded third. Third baseman Brian Anderson then misplayed Tomas Nido's grounder, allowing Reyes to score. 
   McNeil added an RBI triple to make it 3-0, and also had an RBI single in the sixth. The rookie raised his batting average to .340 in 46 games. 
   Rosario added a three-run homer in the fourth off Trevor Richards (3-9). Rosario entered the game batting .322 with a .488 slugging percentage since Aug. 10. 
   Bruce and Smith went deep during a seven-run sixth inning that capped the scoring. 
   The Mets are inviting fans with tickets to Wednesday's scheduled doubleheader back for any home game from Sept. 25-27 or any Monday-Thursday game next April, excluding opening day. 
   -- With News wire services   
