Mets make franchise history in walk-off win over Marlins, sweep doubleheader
   This one was for David Wright. 
   On the day the long-time Met announced he'd return in late September for one last game before walking away from the diamond, his teammates came through with a doubleheader sweep of the rival Marlins. 
   Only for the captain. 
   Michael Conforto and Todd Frazier hit back-to-back home runs with two outs to walk-off the Marlins and give the Mets a 4-3 win in the first bout of the doubleheader Thursday. 
   The Mets took the second game, 5-2, behind a strong six-inning from Jason Vargas. The 35-year-old struck out seven and gave up two earned runs during the nightcap. Rookie Tomas Nido got the Mets on the board in the fifth with his first big league homer, a solo shot off Jeff Brigham in the fifth. Conforto came through again with two hits and three RBI. 
   But the first game featured a franchise milestone. 
   Both dingers from Conforto and Frazier came off Kyle Barraclough and marked the first time in franchise history the Mets hit back-to-back homers in a walk-off win, according to Elias. The Mets have five walk-off victories in this otherwise forgettable season. Only the 1962 and 1963 teams had more, with six. 
   "I was hoping that Michael got on. He did his job, and in my mind I was trying to hit a home run," Frazier said. "Those rarely happen. Got a pitch to hit and kind of squeaked one over, so we'll take it." 
   Steven Matz pitched six innings in the afternoon, giving up three earned runs but his biggest contribution came at the plate in the second inning. 
   The Long Island lefty belted his first career home run, a two-run shot to left field off Sandy Alcantra. 
   "It was just a bad pitch to Matz, but other than that I was able to settle back in and get going," Alcantara said through a translator. 
   It was the first homer by a Mets pitcher since Seth Lugo hit one on July 15, 2017. 
   "Definitely got all of it," Matz said. "Felt good to get my first one." 
   Peter O'Brien and Isaac Galloway went deep in the top of the second against Matz. Galloway's third long ball of the year traveled an estimated 408 feet into the second deck in left. 
   Playing in front of a sparse crowd with several hundred fans scattered around Citi Field, both clubs then traded zeroes until the seventh. 
   Matz retired 13 of 14 before allowing a double to Brian Anderson to start the inning and was lifted after getting Lewis Brinson to fly out. Peter O'Brien lined Drew Smith's first pitch into the right-field corner for a run-scoring single. 
   Matz allowed three runs on three hits in 6 1/3 innings, walking two and striking out four. 
   Adam Conley pitched a scoreless eighth, stranding a runner left by Alcantara, and retired Jay Bruce to start the ninth before being lifted for Barraclough. 
   Jerry Blevins pitched a scoreless ninth for the first win,. while Robert Gsellman picked up a save at night. 
   — With News Wire Services 
