   It’s up to Jacob deGrom now. 
   The Mets ace will take the ball Sunday afternoon with a lot riding on his start against Chris Sale. DeGrom will have a chance to bolster his case for the NL Cy Young award if he can silence the roaring Red Sox lineup, and he could help this improving club take two-of-three from the best team in baseball after the 5-3 loss to Boston on Saturday. 
   All that, of course, depends on a little cooperation from the Mets offense, which he has not gotten all season as the lineup somehow forgets how to drive runs in whenever he takes the mound. 
   After routing the Red Sox on Friday, the Mets gave up an early lead Saturday granted to them by Brandon Nimmo’s three-run homer in the fourth that just got over the glove of a leaping Mookie Betts at the right field fence. 
   Making a spot start, Corey Oswalt only lasted 2.2 innings, giving up a run on three hits. Paul Sewald then gave up four runs in a disastrous bottom of the fifth that included an overturned home run call, digging a hole the Mets could never climb out of. 
   With two outs and two men on, Jackie Bradley Jr. hit a ball to left field that was originally ruled a home run but after review was changed to a two-run double. After intentionally walking Rafael Devers, Sewald was pulled for Drew Smith, who gave up a double to Brock Holt that scored two more runs, effectively negating the call that had gone in the Mets’ favor and giving the Red Sox a lead they would not relinquish. 
   "What's the old saying: Everything happens for a reason," Bradley said of the home run being taken back. "We get an extra run out of it, (and) we won." 
   After the overturned call, Mets manager Mickey Callaway argued that the runner from first should have gone back to third, but the umpires ruled that he would have scored if they hadn't signaled the homer. 
   "I was a little surprised they let one guy score," Callaway said. "But once they set the runners after replay you can't really challenge that." 
   Aside from Nimmo’s home run, the Mets couldn’t muster much offense off Rick Porcello, who went five innings and gave up just two hits, the other coming off the bat of Jeff McNeil, who is now hitting .335. The rookie second baseman, who was not known for his defense when he came up but has proven more than capable, flashed some leather with a full-body diving catch on a J.D. Martinez line drive. 
   Dom Smith, on the other hand — who is still trying to get a foothold on the first base job with Jay Bruce now being thrown into the mix — made two errors and did not help his case in any way. 
   The Mets did not get another hit after Nimmo’s homer as the Boston bullpen threw four perfect innings, capped by familiar nemesis Craig Kimbrel, who sent the Mets down in order in the bottom of the ninth. 
   -- With the Associated Press   
