Australia Diary collects reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. Want to share your story, photo, poem or video? Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
Australia’s bush capital, Canberra, is so-called because the city is very much part of its natural surroundings. It’s not uncommon to find shingleback lizards in backyards, spiny echidnas in suburban parks, or poisonous brown snakes in office workplaces.
Kangaroos are also a regular sight in suburbia, in plague proportions, often feeding on the delicious green ovals normally reserved for cricket and football. 
Living near a nature reserve, my front lawn was also on the menu, despite being slightly yellow and overgrown. I often woke in the morning to find it littered with small pellet souvenirs from the previous night’s soiree.
But then came the day when I found the same droppings on my back lawn, which was far lusher for being recently relaid. The furry little buggers had somehow cottoned on to the restaurant reserving the best food out back, and were undaunted by the need to hop down a driveway, across some paving, and even down some stairs in order to source it.
I didn’t think much of it until the morning when I woke to find a smoke gray joey pinballing around my backyard. It had somehow gotten lost from the mob when it had bounded back up to the mountain at dawn, or had decided to stay on for another course and was now unable to find its way home.
Clearly terrified, the kicking joey needed to find an escape route fast before it injured itself. Calling a ranger would take too long, and I was in no position to try and catch it. 
Spying my fruit bowl, I grabbed an apple, cut it into pieces, and carefully laid an exit trail. Using its highly attuned sense of smell, the tender joey quickly zeroed in on the first slice of sweet apple, then found the second, the third, and finally, the road to freedom, bounding up the concrete driveway and asphalt road to the mountain nearby.
Making myself a thick slice of Vegemite toast, I sat and watched the sun rise.
