Serena Williams Cartoon ‘Not About Race,’ Artist Says. Experts Strongly Disagree.
If you follow tennis or Twitter, at all, you’ve probably seen the cartoon showing Serena Williams stomping on her racket in her United States Open loss on Saturday, with her features exaggerated into a caricature.
It’s a product of Australia — from The Herald Sun, a tabloid in Melbourne owned by Rupert Murdoch. And it has set off an international storm of outrage, with athletes, fans and even J.K. Rowling denouncing the cartoon as sexist and racist.
How did it come to be?
On Tuesday, the artist, Mark Knight, and his boss tried to explain, arguing that their critics missed the point. 
“The cartoon about Serena is about her poor behavior on the day, not about race,” Mr. Knight said in an article on the Herald Sun website about the backlash.
The newspaper’s editor, Damon Johnston, backed him up. 
“A champion tennis player had a mega-tantrum on the world stage, and Mark’s cartoon depicted that,” he said. “It had nothing to do with gender or race.”
Let’s examine that defense — with some history, context and a few experts in both cartooning and Australian race relations. 
In Australia, Mr. Knight is a household name, known for being provocative. Politics and sports are his two main subjects and in defending his Williams cartoon on Twitter, he pointed to a previous critique of the Australian tennis player Nick Kyrgios as proof of his impartiality. By Tuesday evening, Mr. Knight’s Twitter account was no longer active. 
But Mr. Knight’s critics also point out that he has been accused of racist depictions before. 
Earlier this year, he published a cartoon showing African teens fighting and causing destruction. It was an effort to criticize a local politician for banning the display of Sky News, a Murdoch-owned television news channel, from train platforms, but that’s not how it was received.
Many Australians argue that Mr. Knight’s work reflects a wider pattern. Australia has never fully confronted its own history of racism, and scholars say the conversation around race in Australia is not as robust and layered as it is in the United States. 
Ideas like implicit bias are rarely referenced or widely understood, for example, and many people say Mr. Knight’s employer deserves a fair share of the blame. 
Mr. Murdoch’s News Corporation is the largest media company in Australia with assets that include more than 200 newspapers and magazines along with television channels and radio stations. 
Many of these outlets, moving loosely together, have stirred racism for decades. And yet the tone and frequency have been intensifying more recently as their preferred party in Australia, the Liberals, have struggled politically.
The Murdoch press is not alone in the case of Ms. Williams. The sports media in Australia — in general dominated by white, older men —  condemned Ms. Williams’s outburst while dismissing her argument that male players are given more leeway to misbehave.
“This is what Australia does,” said Shareena Clanton, an Aboriginal Australian actress and activist. “This is what it has always done to people of color and, in particular, black women who reach the top.”
“This whole cartoon is vile,” she added, saying that Ms. Williams’s opponent, Naomi Osaka, had been drawn as a white woman. “The fact that it was printed and passed the editor’s room speaks even more volumes about the landscape of our media here in Australia.”
Chris Kindred, a cartoonist in Richmond, Va., said it only confirmed what many Americans already knew. “It’s nothing new,” he said. “Australia has an issue confronting racism. Water is wet.”
Mr. Knight and his editor have said that their motivations were pure.
“I drew this cartoon Sunday night after seeing the U.S. Open final, and seeing the world’s best tennis player have a tantrum and thought that was interesting,” Mr. Knight said in the statement, adding: “The world has just gone crazy.”
[Read more: Serena Williams came in on a high road. It made her fall more devastating.]
That explanation does not work for many cartoonists. Many said that working in the medium of cartooning means soaking up some of the history and that history is, flat out, inseparable from racism.
Twitter quickly made this point.
In interviews, other cartoonists went even further.
“Comics has a very long history of racist iconography, which includes blackface iconography in some of the most acclaimed cartoonists in history,” said Noah Berlatsky, author of Wonder Woman: Bondage and Feminism in the Marston/Peter Comics. 
“Thomas Nast, Winsor McCay, Will Eisner, R. Crumb all used blackface imagery; Dr. Seuss did viciously racist anti-Japanese cartoons during World War II, and on and on,” Mr. Berlatsky said. “Using exaggerated racist imagery for comic effect is one of the most characteristic moves of the comic medium.”
It is hard to believe, he said, that Mr. Knight did not know this history. A spokeswoman for The Herald Sun said Mr. Knight was too busy to be interviewed. But cartoonists who have tried to defend similar work in the past have argued that this history inoculates them — that it’s just how cartooning works.
No way, Mr. Berlatsky said. 
“The problem is that picking up racist iconography from 100 years ago in order to attack a black woman still makes you racist, even if you think you’re participating in the tradition of comics rather than in the tradition of racism,” Mr. Berlatsky said. “The tradition of comics very often has been the same as the tradition of racism, and you can choose to push back against that, or you can be racist. Knight has chosen the second option.”
Not being American, some cartoonists argue, is no excuse.
“While Australia has its own unique colonial history separate from the United States, the Western world, including Australia, share an aesthetic history,” said Ronald Wimberly, an artist and designer known for his commentary on race and comics.
That history includes an effort “to dehumanize black and brown people by degrading their features into symbols of the subhuman,” Mr. Wimberly said, offering a detailed critique of the U.S. Open cartoon, which he described as a failure on many levels:
Mr. Wimberly said there was only one conclusion that anyone who knows anything about cartooning or race could come to: “Whether or not Mark intended to draw on the racist history of the symbols, he has. His intent is irrelevant. Either he is a deliberately racist cartoonist — or an incompetent and careless cartoonist.”
Mr. Kindred, the cartoonist in Virginia, said that it ultimately comes down to quality, not just sensitivity. 
“We want people to make better commentary,” he said. “Racism is a lazy joke to lean on.”
