Women in Australia’s Parliament Denounce Sexism in Push for Change
SYDNEY, Australia — The women were members of Australia’s Parliament, but they said some male colleagues were more interested in commenting on their hair or their wardrobe choices than discussing policy. One recalled being asked if she had entered politics to find a husband. They said male lawmakers hectored them during speeches and even blew kisses at them.
Rebekha Sharkie, a lawmaker who was elected in 2016, said she started to dread giving speeches about legislation because of one colleague’s persistence in antagonizing her.
“It’s really just this bullying behavior that has been allowed to fester,” Ms. Sharkie said.
Sexism has long been part of the reality faced by women in Parliament. But fallout from the nasty political upheaval last month that ousted Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull has led to forceful new protests over the issue, after allegations emerged that male lawmakers had bullied and intimidated female colleagues during the governing Liberal Party’s back-room negotiations.
Julie Bishop, who resigned as foreign minister after her bid to replace Mr. Turnbull failed, said in a speech last week that women in Parliament had long been subjected to “appalling behavior.”
“It is evident that there is an acceptance of a level of behavior in Canberra that would not be tolerated in any other workplace in Australia,” she said.
Ms. Bishop and others say the consequences of that environment are dire for national politics — stifling the input of women, hampering their ascent into leadership roles and discouraging potential candidates.
Another Liberal Party lawmaker, Julia Banks, cited the difficult climate for women last month when she announced that she would quit politics instead of contesting her seat in the next election. “Women have suffered in silence for too long,” she said.
That came just a few weeks after Senator Sarah Hanson-Young took the extraordinary step of suing a male colleague for defamation, after he told her on the Senate floor during a debate over women’s safety to “stop shagging men.”
Many trace the reckoning happening now to the broader #MeToo movement that has swept across institutions and industries around the world since last year. But it was the leadership “spill” last month, which led to Scott Morrison becoming the country’s sixth prime minister in 11 years, that brought the issue to a head.
[Sign up for the weekly Australia Letter to get locally reported news and insights with international context in your inbox.]
The treatment of Ms. Bishop, a veteran of Liberal Party politics who was the party’s deputy leader, has become a rallying point. Some commentators were astonished that the party’s lawmakers rejected her bid to replace Mr. Turnbull, despite polls indicating that she was much more popular with the public than either Mr. Morrison or Peter Dutton, another contender for the leadership.
In her speech last week, Ms. Bishop, who has resisted being labeled a feminist, leveled criticism at her own party for failing to attract more women. She said it was “not acceptable” for the party to have “less than 25 percent of our parliamentarians as female.”
“Ultimately, Julie Bishop is the collateral damage of the Liberal Party’s macho politics,” Katrina Lee-Koo, an international relations professor at Monash University, wrote in an essay published by BroadAgenda, a website focusing on gender equality issues.
The party’s lawmakers “simply overlooked Bishop as a legitimate and credible leader,” she wrote.
Some lawmakers described the leadership challenge as a ferocious episode of political jousting. Senator Lucy Gichuhi detailed bullying behavior that left some of her colleagues in tears, and she said she was weighing publicly naming the members who she believes were behind it.
The spill certainly inflamed the tension in Parliament, but women have long struggled to find a foothold there.
Australia has slipped in recent years in world rankings of the percentage of female lawmakers in national legislatures, currently coming in 50th according to figures maintained by the Inter-Parliamentary Union. (The United States is 102nd.)
Some, like Ms. Sharkie, have suggested that the climate for women could improve if Parliament created a “code of conduct” to rein in inappropriate behavior. There has also been a push to implement quotas to increase women’s representation in the Liberal Party, though those calls have been rebuffed in recent years.
Mr. Morrison has offered assurances that the Liberal Party “will absolutely deal with this issue.”
“I have no truck with bullying,” he said, “whether it’s in a classroom, whether it’s in a workplace or with a broadcaster.”
Some say Parliament simply reflects the rough-and-tumble nature of Australian politics, where sharp elbows and robust debate dominate. Alan Jones, a prominent radio broadcaster, suggested in a television appearance that members who were complaining should “take a teaspoon full of cement and toughen up.”
“I’m frankly a little bit disgusted by that,” Kelly O’Dwyer, the minister for women, countered in an interview with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
She agreed that politics could be bruising.
“But, clearly, there is behavior that is outside the accepted bounds,” she added. “The truth is, across all political lines, we as women and as people of good standing need to say it is not acceptable to bully and intimidate.”
Cathy McGowan, an independent member of Parliament, said the recent complaints had been addressed with a seriousness that indicated a cultural shift for the better.
“I think there would have been a time in Australian history where that would not have happened,” she said.
Even so, critics argue that there is a growing sense that Canberra continues to subscribe to an outmoded way of operating that leaves women and minorities in the back seat, in a government steered largely by white men.
“This is the problem of what I call the toxic masculinity of Australian Parliament,” said Susan Harris Rimmer, an associate professor at Griffith Law School. “We take school kids and tourists and foreign dignitaries to visit Parliament, and I’m always terrified of what they’re going to see.”
The episode involving Ms. Hanson-Young has been cited as an example. She filed the defamation lawsuit against another senator, David Leyonhjelm, who continued the war of words with Ms. Hanson-Young beyond the initial debate.
“I am prepared to rephrase my comments,” Mr. Leyonhjelm said in a subsequent television interview. “I strongly urge Senator Hanson-Young to continue shagging men as she pleases.”
Frustration over how women have been treated in Australian politics reaches back decades.
Natasha Stott Despoja, a former senator and leader of the Australian Democrats, said that when she was elected more than 20 years ago, news articles routinely included references to her age and her blond hair. When she got married, she said, one newspaper assigned a reporter to be on “pregnancy watch.”
“I could go on and on,” she said.
Ms. Sharkie said the recent turmoil had signaled how Parliament was drifting from the rest of the country, and that failing to urgently address the issue could undermine the public’s faith in its leaders.
“The culture, it has to change,” Ms. Sharkie said. “It’s not representative of the wider community.”
The accusations of sexism, she added, offered “just another example of why the broader Australian public has little respect for politicians.”
