The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter, reflecting the experience (and quirks) of our Australia bureau chief, a Yank who’s convinced he has the best job in journalism. Sign up to get it by email and forward it to friends if you get the urge. 
______
I’m traveling in the Pacific islands this week, working on a couple of stories about geopolitics and climate change. What a stunning part of the world this is, seemingly so close and so far from Australia at the same time.
I’ll have more on that once I do more reporting and writing but in the meantime, I’m going to turn this week’s newsletter over to all of you.
[Note to newcomers: All our Australia stories can always be found at nytimes.com/au]
Below are some of the reader suggestions sent in after I asked for recommendations in last week’s newsletter. I had expected simply a favorite book or movie, but a lot of you shared far more creative ideas for both weekend enjoyment, and future stories. Love the ambition! And the range!
Journalism in collaboration with a great audience really is more fun, and more enriching. With that in mind, rather than keep it all to myself, here’s a sampling:
• Aquatic Treats
Louise Ingall recommended several wonderful aquatic gems beyond the usual cities and coastal spots. Topping her list was Merewether Baths in Newcastle. “It is as good,” she said, “as anything coming through on your Instagram feed from all the people who have escaped to the Mediterranean!”
She also put in a plug for the Moree Artesian Aquatic Centre: “A long way from Sydney but a long soak and swim in these waters rejuvenates body and mind.”
Both sound pretty fantastic.
• American Pale Ale in Australia
Graham Hornel suggests we look into craft breweries in Australia — “possibly first introduced in the James Squire Hop Thief mass-produced brand created under the supervision of beer legend, Dr. Chuck Hahn, from Colorado via New Zealand.”
• Philosophers, Unite!
Valerie Austin made me smile with this question and suggestion for a story: “What are philosophers writing about in Australia? How can this influence culture and politics today?”
If you’ve got an answer on that one, do share — I’m always a fan of Big Thoughts on Frustrating Problems (and in fact, we have a great philosophy column in the Opinion section called The Stone that I bet Valerie already knows and loves).
• More Culture, Please
What else should we be doing?
Dan Friedman also provided a coverage suggestion: “Please consider adding arts coverage, especially books, television serials and films.”
To which I am happy to say, good idea, Dan. We’re working to add more of that from Australia in the coming weeks.
• Southwell Station
Finally, for this week at least, a travel suggestion from Jessie Doan: “You should consider going to Southwell Station. It’s remote, beautiful and quite wonderful. Nooki will cook you things that are surprisingly wonderful, albeit rough. The landscape is striking.”
Now here are our stories of the week and a travel tip drawn from my experience reporting in challenging countries. Share your travel tips if you get the urge, in our NYT Australia Facebook group, or by emailing us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
And one quick (and exciting) announcement: Nikole Hannah-Jones, an award-winning New York Times investigative reporter covering racial justice in the United States, will be appearing at two live events this month.
First, Nikole will be taking part in a conversation on race and politics with the actress Shareena Clanton at the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne on June 17 at 7 p.m. as part of the exhibition MoMA at NGV: 130 Years of Modern and Contemporary Art. Get tickets here with the discount code NGVNYtimes.
She’ll also discuss these issues with Prof. Megan Davis at the University of New South Wales in Sydney on June 18 at 6:30 p.m. Book your free tickets now.
I’ll be moderating both discussions, and our goal is to create a thoughtful and candid conversation on race and politics, spanning the past and present in both the United States and Australia.
______
Many were shocked to learn that the fashion designer Kate Spade, 55, died on Tuesday in an apparent suicide. The Times’s chief fashion critic, Vanessa Friedman, puts Ms. Spade’s legacy into context and explains how the designer reinvented luxury in the 1990s as fun, unpretentious and attainable.
If you or someone you know needs help within Australia, call Lifeline on 13 11 14 or the Suicide Call Back Service on 1300 659 467.
______
Thanks to a Times investigation this week, we now know Facebook shared personal user data with Apple, Samsung, Amazon and dozens of other device makers.
On Tuesday, the story went deeper when we learned Facebook has data-sharing partnerships with at least four Chinese electronics firms. One of the companies, Huawei, has links to the Chinese government and has been flagged by American officials as a national security threat. Australia’s federal government also has security concerns about the company.
______
The headline says “Paris,” but really, it’s about eating alone anywhere. Why does eating alone tempt us and terrify us? This thoughtful article switches between psychological research and literary musings on the subject.
A nice line to mull on as you tuck into your next meal (unescorted): “When you’re not sitting across from someone, you’re sitting across from the world.”
______
• A Novel Based on the True Story of a Con Man and His Ghostwriter
• Jill Ker Conway, 83, Feminist Author and Smith President, Dies
• An Alternate Australian Universe
• Australian Politician’s Partner Says Party Urged Abortion
• Amazon Rankles Australian Customers by Pushing Them to a Local Site
•  The Best Movies and TV New to Netflix Australia in June
• What Movies to See (or Skip) in Australian Cinemas This June
______
It’s the simple things that make reporting trips in remote places a little easier.
Like bags.
I always travel with a simple cotton tote bag where I can put things I don’t necessarily want everyone to notice right away, like a camera. It takes up barely any space in a suitcase and always comes in handy.
I also travel with a slightly larger waterproof bag, a 20-liter Sea to Summit Drysack. You’d be surprised how often you want something light and bright to keep things dry — especially in this part of the world.
