In Eastern Europe, Populism Lives, Widening a Split in the E.U.
BRUSSELS — The populist surge that threatened this year to engulf Western Europe and created existential worries for Brussels seems to have slowed, if not crested.
Nigel Farage, the populist who helped engineer Britain’s vote to exit the European Union, is now a mostly marginalized talk-show host. Marine Le Pen, who terrified the French establishment as the presidential candidate of the National Front, was soundly vanquished. Geert Wilders, who came in second in the Dutch election in March, was sidelined in the four-party coalition that finally emerged.
But there is a different story going on in the east, which has become a showcase for populism in its many varieties, widening a fissure in the bloc.
The four countries of the European Union’s east that make older members anxious — Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia — are all led by populists of one stripe or another.
Populism is not easy to define, the roots of its success are varied, and its adherents do not represent a single ideology, even if they all criticize uncontrolled migration, especially of Muslims. But their success is fragmenting traditional politics and making coalition governments harder to build.
That is certainly the case in Central Europe. The populist, far-right Alternative for Germany has complicated life for Chancellor Angela Merkel, who is still struggling to form a coalition after September elections in which the party finished third. In Austria, Sebastian Kurz, just 31, is now expected to become chancellor after running a populist campaign that co-opted the anti-immigration message of the far-right Freedom Party.
The situation in Germany and Austria is a reminder that populism remains a force to be reckoned with, even if its advance in much of Western Europe has been held off for now.
And the fact that populists now run governments in Eastern and Central Europe threatens to further legitimize movements that once sat on the political fringe.
In the Czech Republic, Andrej Babis, an oligarch who rode a wave of anger toward the corruption and complacency of conventional politics, won a resounding election in October.
“The national situations are different but the overall trend is the same,” said Milan Nic of the German Council on Foreign Relations. “It’s everywhere, but the east is more exposed or weaker because democracy began or was renewed only 25 years ago.”
Jiri Pehe, a Czech scholar who worked closely with the former Czech president Vaclav Havel, said that the election of Mr. Babis “is of course part of a trend, but at the same time there are variations to the theme.”
The four nations, known as the Visegrad countries, have four very different populists, he said.
Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary “is a right-wing nationalist”; the Polish leader Jaroslaw Kaczynski “is an ideologue” obsessed with Russia and the death of his twin brother; Prime Minister Robert Fico of Slovakia “is a left-wing populist”; and Mr. Babis is closer in spirit, Mr. Pehe said, to figures like President Trump and the former Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi, promising to rid the country of corruption and run it like a business.
Early suggestions that Mr. Babis was far-right were overblown, these analysts say. He is not considered, like Mr. Orban and Mr. Kaczynski, to be trying to create an authoritarian, one-party state — “like the Communist state, only run by themselves,” said Norman Davies, a distinguished historian of the region who is now at Pembroke College, Cambridge.
What ties the populists together, Mr. Pehe said, is that they “ride the wave of anxiety — about globalization, migration and new phenomena — and appeal to those looking for some protection.”
Anxieties about national identity are particularly strong in the former Communist countries, which were subjugated by the Soviet Union and have only recently regained sovereignty.
They are eager to remain part of the European Union as a protection against Russia and as a generous source of regional aid and jobs for anyone willing to travel within the bloc.
But they are anxious at the same time about the principle of shared governance, and don’t like taking orders from Brussels.
Especially in the Czech Republic, which never embraced the 1993 divorce with Slovakia, identity is fluid, with the political system essentially imploding after Mr. Havel’s presidency, Mr. Pehe suggested.
“The Slovaks used the divorce in a positive way, proving themselves to the world as a new nation, while the Czechs were left with nostalgia and regret,” Mr. Pehe said.
That lack of clear identity, he said, “plays a role in the crisis,” since threats like migration or further steps toward European integration only reinforce anxiety.
As citizens of a small country stuck between empires, Czechs have always had an “inborn skepticism” of authority, said Tomas Valasek, director of Carnegie Europe, a research institution based in Brussels.
Mr. Babis has no clear ideology or politics, Mr. Valasek said. “He decided to run because he felt that Czech society was broken, inefficient and could be managed,” he said.
He is likely to be malleable, Mr. Valasek said, citing Slovakia’s Mr. Fico, who began by being strongly anti-Europe and is now a great defender of the bloc — though objecting, like all the region’s leaders, to taking in a quota of Muslim migrants ordered by the European Commission.
Mr. Valasek, too, sees anti-immigration and anti-European Union views spreading westward, though not winning majorities.
“These voters are not entirely wrong,” he said. “The Germans and the Austrians also have an innate sense of longing for order and hatred of chaos.”
While the Brussels demand to take a quota of migrants was principled, Mr. Valasek said, “it was always going to elicit a backlash — countries want control over numbers of migrants and the ability to decide who is a migrant and who is a real refugee.”
Popular skepticism about E.U. migration is reasonable, because the system is obviously broken, Mr. Valasek said, even though the numbers of migrants are down given questionable deals with Turkey and Libya and tougher policies from Italy and Germany.
But it was Hungary and Mr. Orban who first put up border fences, arguing at the height of the crisis that freedom of movement within the European Union required secure borders around it.
That argument has found increasing support from many of the same Western politicians, worried about the populist backlash, who excoriated his rhetoric and lack of “solidarity” in refusing to take even a small quota of migrants.
“Migration plays an important role in both the western and eastern elections,” said Miroslav Mares, a professor of political science who studies the far right at Masaryk University in Brno, Czech Republic.
Even though the numbers of migrants are very low in the eastern countries, all victorious candidates used strong anti-immigration rhetoric and tied it into fears of terrorism, Mr. Mares said, much as the far-right Alternative for Germany did.
Mr. Davies sees the common denominator “as mass resentments about one thing or another,” but those issues can vary country to country.
“A significant segment of the population in each of these countries feels that they have been robbed of something, been misled and cheated,” he said.
But while Americans may resent its loss of dominance and the rise of China, and Britain the end of the glory days of empire, he said, “the resentments in the former Soviet bloc are the missed opportunities of the freedom they received in 1989.”
No one regrets the disappearance of communism, Mr. Davies said, but “they do resent the way the new order was founded and where the benefits went, mostly to a narrow elite.”
They also believe, or are led to believe, Mr. Davies said, “that they are surrounded by enemies, either from without — usually Germany or Russia — or from within.”
But Mr. Davies is more sanguine than many. The sheer variety of the targets means that there is no united movement that will spread, he said.
“There is no single virus,” he said, “and I don’t think there is a lot of staying power.”
