Israel Penalizes Palestinians for Payments to Prisoners and ‘Martyrs’
JERUSALEM — Israel will begin withholding funds from the Palestinian Authority to penalize it for paying stipends to Palestinian prisoners in Israel, their families and the families of Palestinians killed or wounded in confrontations with Israelis.
In an emotionally charged vote that crossed party lines, the Israeli Knesset, or Parliament, approved legislation on Monday night requiring the Israeli authorities to withhold a portion of the monthly transfers of tax revenues that Israel collects on behalf of the Western-backed Palestinian Authority, under previous interim peace accords.
The Palestinian leadership describes the payments as necessary social welfare, and many Palestinians revere the prisoners and so-called “martyrs” for the Palestinian cause as heroes. Many Israelis say the stipends encourage violence and reward terrorism.
The amount to be withheld each month will equal one-twelfth of the total amount of stipends paid by the Palestinian Authority the year before. According to the law, the Israeli cabinet can decide if, or when, to release the frozen funds — but only after the defense ministry determines that the Palestinian Authority, led by President Mahmoud Abbas, has stopped paying the stipends.
The law passed by a vote of 87 to 15 in the 120-seat parliament. The remainder were absent.
The Authority’s insistence on providing the stipends has long roiled Israel. Dubbed by critics as a “pay to slay” policy, the payments benefit tens of thousands of families — including those of suicide bombers — and are estimated to have amounted to more than $300 million, and take up roughly 7 percent of the Palestinian Authority’s annual budget.
“We promised to halt the salary-for-terrorists fest, and we have fulfilled our promise,” Israel’s defense minister, Avigdor Lieberman, wrote on Twitter. Referring to Mr. Abbas by his popular name, he added, “Now it’s final. Every shekel that Abu Mazen pays to terrorists and murderers will be automatically deducted from the Palestinian Authority’s budget. An effective war against terror also hits the pocket, of the terrorists, of their families and of Abu Mazen.”
Palestinian officials say that many of the prisoners or the dead were not involved in attacking Israelis, and that stopping the payments would anger many Palestinians. Mr. Abbas says that violence does not serve the Palestinian cause and that he supports only nonviolent resistance, and yet all Palestinians who are killed in the conflict are honored in Palestinian society as “martyrs” and all those in jail in Israel are considered political prisoners.
The Palestinian Cabinet denounced the Israeli law to deduct the equivalent of the stipends from their tax revenue as “financial piracy.” In a statement on Tuesday, it called the legislation “another clear Israeli violation of signed agreements.”
Israel collects the taxes on behalf of the Authority from the earnings of Palestinian day laborers, merchants who live in Palestinian territory but do business in Israel, and from customs on Palestinian imports through Israeli ports.
Issa Qaraqe, the Palestinian Authority’s commissioner of prisoner affairs, told the official Voice of Palestine Radio on Tuesday, “The goal of this law is not only theft, but to delegitimize the Palestinian struggle, which is represented by our martyrs and prisoners, by branding them as criminals and terrorists.”
“What they don’t know is that no Palestinian is willing to abandon our martyrs and prisoners — people who have sacrificed for our national struggle,” he said. “This is our national duty and we will not abandon it. So the government will continue to pay these stipends to the families, even if we are in financial crisis.”
In March, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel praised the United States government for passing a law that suspended some financial aid to the Palestinians over the stipends paid to families of Palestinians killed or jailed in fighting with Israel. That law was named the Taylor Force Act, after an American killed in Israel by a Palestinian in 2016. Mr. Force’s father, Stuart Force, attended the debate and the vote in the Knesset.
Israel collects more than $100 million a month in customs and other taxes on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, which makes up a significant portion of the Palestinian budget. Israel has impounded the money for periods in the past, as a punitive measure or to pressure the Palestinian leadership.
In 2015, Israel suspended the tax transfers for several months in response to a Palestinian move to join the International Criminal Court. The accrued funds were eventually released, partly in response to a recommendation from Israel’s security establishment, which feared that depriving the Palestinian Authority of resources undermined stability in its territory, working against Israel’s interests.
Australia said on Monday that it was ending direct aid to the Palestinian Authority for fear that some of it would end up funding “activities that Australia would never support,” and that its annual $10 million in direct funding would be redirected to meet Palestinian needs through a United Nations humanitarian fund.
Julie Bishop, the Australian foreign minister, said in a statement, “Any assistance provided by the Palestine Liberation Organization to those convicted of politically motivated violence is an affront to Australian values, and undermines the prospect of meaningful peace between Israel and the Palestinians.”
