MELBOURNE, Australia — The Australian government on Thursday formally rejected a proposal to amend the country’s Constitution to add a body representing Indigenous people.
A government-appointed Indigenous group called the Referendum Council made the proposal in June, seeking a national referendum to create the body which it called a Voice to Parliament.
In rejecting the proposal Friday, Australian officials said, “The government does not believe such an addition to our national representative institutions is either desirable or capable of winning acceptance in a referendum.” The decision was announced in a joint statement by the prime minister, the attorney general and the minister for Indigenous affairs.
The decision was a blow to advocates for Indigenous people, and to those drawing cautious optimism from a national dialogue on Indigenous rights after years of uncertainty.
Megan Davis, a constitutional lawyer on the Referendum Council, said Australia lagged behind its peers on the issue.
“It’s no exaggeration to say that we are outliers internationally as being one of the few Western liberal democratic systems that provide no public recognition and accommodation of Indigenous peoples’ rights,” said Ms. Davis, a professor of law at the University of New South Wales.
The council also asked for recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples through parliamentary action, though that was vaguely defined.
The term “recognition” has proven to be loaded both legally and politically, as it could range from a symbolic inclusion in Australia’s Constitution, to the granting of a degree of autonomy, as seen with Indigenous people in Canada and Russia.
The government said its dismissal of the idea was rooted in what it saw as two flawed notions: that the establishment of an Indigenous body — advisory or otherwise — separate from Parliament would have been consistent with democratic principles, and that the proposal could have succeeded in a national referendum.
“We have rejected something that was simply not going to get up,” Nigel Scullion, Australia’s minister for Indigenous Affairs, said Thursday in an interview on Thursday.
Mr. Scullion said the proposal would have had “zero chance of success” in such a vote. When asked what evidence he had for that assertion, Mr. Scullion responded, “I don’t need evidence.”
But Professor Davis pushed back on both of the government’s reasons, saying that the government was distorting the role of the proposed Indigenous body, and that the assumption that the referendum would fail had no scientific polling to support it.
The proposal was written up as the Uluru Statement of the Heart: a formal call for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to have a representative body and a process for treaties. Hundreds of Indigenous leaders contributed in formulating the proposal.
Though the path ahead for constitutional Indigenous recognition again looks murky, advocates remained steeled.
“It’s over 10 years now since constitutional recognition has been discussed in one form or another,” said Patrick Dodson, a senator for Western Australia who is one of three Indigenous members of Parliament. “I’m sad to say that this is probably a recipe for obfuscating and putting it off for another day.”
Professor Davis said: “In a historical context, it’s not surprising. Political elites have never seriously engaged with ideas for reform from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. We will forge ahead. We’ve always struggled for everything we’ve got.”
