The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email.
___
Parliament approved a bill this week to allow medical evacuation for asylum seekers on Nauru and Manus over the opposition of Prime Minister Scott Morrison, throwing Australia into another visceral debate over immigration.
In the coming months, with an election approaching, we can expect to hear all kinds of intense and moralistic rhetoric.
Mr. Morrison and his supporters are already arguing that opening the door even a little to settlement in Australia will encourage a flood of migrants and deaths at sea. Labor, the Greens and others on the left are maintaining that immigration is a net positive for Australia and that cruelty must be restrained.
This is all part of a broader conversation across the West about migration and national identity; the White House announced just today that President Trump will declare a state of emergency to build a border wall.
And it’s a conversation that matters. These disputes, however they end up, will shape many countries, and the world, for decades.
But for me, there’s a certain familiarity to the discussion, not just in Washington but also in Canberra.
I’ve written about immigration for nearly 20 years, from various countries, from the neighborhoods and towns where immigrants cluster to the halls of power where decisions are made.
Along the way, there are a few things I’ve learned to look out for.
The Hero Vs. Villain Trap
In heated moments like this one, immigrants and the nuances of their lives and motivations tend to be reduced to the most simplistic of archetypes.
Either they are criminals (the worst of the worst, rapists, murders, pedophiles) or they are blameless hard-working heroes (say, doctors or professional basketball players from Australia in the N.B.A.).
The reality — and this should be obvious, but often gets overlooked — is that most migrants are in the messy middle with the rest of us. They’re good and bad, they’re parents and workers, and they’re mostly just trying to make life a little bit better for themselves and their loved ones.
This idea that they are somehow different and more extreme reflects little more than the political need for narrative and division. Beware of the packaging of simplicity.
“It’s a Fact-Free Zone”
When I was reporting a series of stories back in 2012 — the first to show that the era of mass Mexican migration was over — an expert I talked to warned that policymakers would ignore my findings.
Immigration, he said, is an issue driven by emotion. “It’s a fact-free zone,” he said. And he was right.
No matter how many cold hard facts get put into the public domain in the next few months — and I hope there are a lot of them — don’t expect the politicians to adjust their arguments. They’re appealing less to the head than the heart.
And look out for what’s missing too.
You probably won’t hear anyone, for example, pointing out that the decision to migrate is typically a long-term bet, calculated and paid for over several years, which rarely responds to immediate policy changes in predictable ways.
There are both push (from a country) and pull (to a country) factors and, according to sociologists and demographers, it is often impossible to make sweeping cause-and-effect conclusions based on one element alone.
Every immigrant has a story all their own. People move and flee for reasons that often have very little to do with what policymakers do to deter or assist them.
Interaction Wins
During a long road trip from the Mexican to the Canadian border, for a project exploring immigration in Middle America, I met dozens of Americans with all kinds of views about immigration.
But there are two people, both older white women, who I still think about.
One was in Farmers Branch, Texas, an area that had tried, but failed, to push out immigrants who might not be documented with a series of strict residential rental rules and policing. She told me through her locked screen door that she wanted tougher enforcement; she was afraid.
Another was in Wichita, in Kansas, in an area that had gone from a declining white, working-class community to one that was reviving but more mixed in terms of ethnicity and origin.
The woman’s name was Francene Sharp. You can read her full story here, but what stuck with me was her reaction to a break in at her home by some local Mexican teenagers.
She had cause to be angry. But because she’d spent years getting to know many of her other immigrant neighbors — including a friend who she called for help right after the break in — her response and her views were tempered and calm.
What she had (that the woman in Texas did not) was real-life interaction, enough of it to prevent her from making sweeping judgments about people or policy.
She relied on her own deep experience and a remarkable openness to combat the “fact-free zone” and the “hero/villain trap.”
Border policy was on her radar; she was no supporter of “open borders.” But she was far more interested in why those teenagers who broke in were not at home studying. Integration and community mattered more to her than border walls.
Which brings me to what I’ll be looking for in this year’s Australian (and American) immigration debate.
Will there be people pushing the conversation beyond border enforcement and detention?
Who, if anyone, will be asking: How can immigration be studied, discussed and shaped in conjunction with immigrants to ensure that Australia (the country that often calls itself “the world’s most successful multicultural nation”) lives up to that promise?
Now for a few stories of the week (plus a few surprising recommendations from Paul Krugman).
As always, you can share your thoughts in our NYT Australia Facebook group. And if you’re enjoying this newsletter, don’t forget to share it and tell your friends to sign up too.
___
A few years ago, that lake you see above (it’s in the Swiss Alps) didn’t exist — it was just ice. Now, with glaciers melting all over Europe due to climate change, the dynamics of the land, and tourism, are changing.
But not everyone in Switzerland is upbeat about it; don’t miss our magazine profile of the tiny Swiss company that thinks it can help stop climate change
And while you’re at it, read our Op-Ed on climate change and the frightening new normal in Australia.
___
Several women say Ryan Adams — who had a reputation in the music business for drunken misbehavior back when I covered music years ago — offered to jump start their music careers, then pursued them sexually and in some cases retaliated when they spurned him.
He denies the claims. But The Times talked to several women with similar accounts, and the reports are already stirring a conversation about the consequences of a “sex, drugs and rock ‘n’ roll culture” that has defined rock music for decades.
___
If you’re not already a regular listener to The New York Times’s award-winning podcast, The Daily, go back and listen to this episode, which captures a conversation between our publisher, A.G. Sulzberger, and President Trump.
It will help you understand how The Times thinks, less in terms of politics than in terms of journalism and journalists around the world.
___
Lots of good stuff this week, tilting toward enterprise reporting and analysis:
• The Strange Experience of Being Australia’s First Tech Billionaires: In a country where wealth usually comes from mining or banking, Scott Farquhar and Mike Cannon-Brookes of Atlassian are a new kind of mogul. And they’re getting into politics.
• In Tour of Australia, Chinese Admire Clean Air but Bemoan Lack of Hot Drinking Water: We spent four days with a group of Chinese tourists visiting Australia. The visitors and locals approached each other with confusion, skepticism and sometimes racism.
• New Zealand Fears Fraying Ties With China, Its Biggest Customer: The cancellation of a tourism initiative and the abrupt return of an Air New Zealand flight has many suspecting Chinese retaliation for a ban on Huawei.
• Australia to Allow Medical Evacuation for Nauru and Manus Island Detainees: Prime Minister Scott Morrison had opposed the bill, which will let some asylum seekers held on Pacific islands be treated medically in Australia.
• Aboriginal Hunters’ Fires Help Restore an Australian Desert: A study of how the Martu shaped their land presents an example where humans seem to benefit an environment perceived as wilderness.
Food and Drink
• In Sydney, Sri Lankan Cuisine Gets a Thrilling Update: Lankan Filling Station serves exciting sambols alongside cocktails and natural wine in a crowded room that thrums with energy.
• In Tasmania, a Gin Boom Showcasing Native Plants (and Even Sheep Whey): Gin from the south Australian island state is on the rise. In trendy bars throughout Australia, entire pages on menus are devoted to Tasmanian gins.
Opinion
• Letter From an Australian Jail: An Iranian Kurdish writer, detained for six years on a remote island for seeking asylum in Australia, proves that words are more powerful than fences.
• The Alarming Allure of Australia’s Brumbies: The environment is being sacrificed for a national myth.
... And in case you missed the link above:
• Opinion: Australia’s Burning, Flooding, Disastrous New Normal: We are a land of proudly resilient people. But in an age of climate change, we can’t just hike up our Stubbies and move on.
___
...And We Recommend
Earlier this week in Melbourne, I hosted a discussion with Paul Krugman, the veteran New York Times columnist and Nobel-prize-winning economist.
We talked about trade and politics, of course, but at dinner the night before, Paul also told me that late in life, he’d become an indie rock fanatic.
So here are a few recommendations from Paul, not for how to prevent recession, but rather for what to listen to when you’re worried about the world.
• Wolf Alice
• Warpaint
• The Lone Bellow
