London’s ‘Walkie Talkie,’ a Divisive Skyscraper, Sells for $1.7 Billion
LONDON — Officially, it is 20 Fenchurch Street. To Londoners, it is the “Walkie Talkie,” so named for its unique shape, with the building bulging out as it rises into the British capital’s skyline.
On Thursday, the 37-story office block was sold to LKK Health Products Group, a Hong Kong-based company best known for making Lee Kum Kee oyster sauce, for 1.3 billion pounds, or about $1.7 billion.
The Walkie Talkie has not always been so highly coveted.
The building was criticized almost immediately after it opened in 2014. Rowan Moore, an architecture critic for The Observer newspaper, described it as “bloated, not elegant.”
“It has no meaningful or enjoyable relationship to anything else, either at street level or on the skyline,” Mr. Moore wrote at the time.
Aside from its aesthetic qualities, the skyscraper also had practical problems. A permanent sunshade had to be installed after the concave shape created a focused glare that, according to complaints, reflected onto roads and damaged vehicles and buildings.
One journalist even managed to fry an egg in the heat.
LKK said its purchase of the Walkie Talkie was the “largest ever transaction in the United Kingdom for a stand-alone office building.” The healthy price tag suggests the skyscraper has earned acceptance — but it would not be the first time a much-maligned building had finally found fans.
Nowadays, it attracts about seven million visitors a year (including, this month, President Trump), but the Paris monument, erected in 1889, has not always been viewed positively.
The writer Guy de Maupassant saw the Eiffel Tower as an affront to France’s cultural heritage, saying he dined at the restaurant there only because that was the only place he could go where he didn’t have to look at it. And Charles Garnier, the architect responsible for the Paris Opéra, described the Eiffel Tower as a “funnel planted on its fat butt.” The satirist Léon Bloy called it a “truly tragic street lamp.”
Despite its general acceptance as a symbol of the French capital, modern tourists are sometimes just as unkind. One review on the travel website TripAdvisor described it as “Just a big Chunk of Metal… Overrated.” (The visitor from Vermont gave it one star out of five.)
Gustave Eiffel, however, defended his work, arguing that “there is an attraction in the colossal.”
Only a quarter of the Art Nouveau church had been built when Antoni Gaudí was killed by a streetcar in 1926, and more than 90 years on, it is still unfinished. Efforts to complete it have proved divisive.
Demonstrations have argued that the building should remain unfinished. Protesters contend that, because Gaudí’s plans were destroyed, moves to complete it would be based on conjecture, destroying the integrity of his work.
Gaudí’s work can be seen across Barcelona, but the church project raised hackles as far back as 1883, when the architect was first commissioned — some religious leaders expressed concerns that the Sagrada Familia would overwhelm the city’s existing Gothic cathedral.
Opposition came from farther afield as well. The author George Orwell described the Sagrada Familia as “one of the most hideous buildings in the world” in “Homage to Catalonia,” arguing that anarchists during the Spanish Civil War “showed bad taste in not blowing it up when they had the chance.”
The project nevertheless attracts about three million visitors a year, and their admission fees help with the construction costs. The building is expected to be completed by 2026.
Made with a parasol roof to provide protection from the sun and the rain, the High Court building in Chandigarh is part of a complex developed by the French architect Le Corbusier.
The complex is on Unesco’s World Heritage List as part of a recognition of Le Corbusier’s work, but people have not always been fond of it.
In 1982, a correspondent for The New York Times reported that the complex “languishes in a poorly maintained condition.”
“The buildings don’t have animation,” said Aditya Prakash, then the head of the College of Architecture in Chandigarh.
In 2008, furniture from the office was being sold by the authorities, who only later realized the value of the objects. Three years later, local architects and officials had to ask for help to prevent the stripping of the site, according to The Guardian. Even manhole covers from the complex were coveted by collectors, the newspaper reported.
There has been little love for the Brutalist building, designed by Paul Rudolph in the late 1960s.
Paul Goldberger, Vanity Fair’s architecture critic, said of Mr. Rudolph’s vision: “His assertive modernist buildings of concrete and glass are not what anyone would call user-friendly.”
The authorities apparently agreed.
When it fell into disrepair, the county government called for it to be demolished, a process that started in 2015. (The authorities later opted for a restoration.)
The building did, however, have one notable defender: the British-Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid. The “beauty is in its austerity,” Ms. Hadid wrote in 2015. “There are no additions to make it polite or cute. It is what it is.”
