Netanyahu Lands in U.S., but New Scandal Could Mar His Big Moment
WASHINGTON — Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu landed in Washington on Sunday for what amounted to a brief campaign swing through the White House, hoping that President Trump’s praise and latest gift — recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights — would persuade wavering voters that his diplomatic achievements should offset any worries about his integrity.
Yet with barely two weeks left until Israel’s parliamentary elections, in which he is running neck and neck with Benny Gantz, a retired army chief, a fresh new scandal has embroiled Mr. Netanyahu, delaying his flight to Washington by hours and dogging him even after he arrived.
Mr. Netanyahu, who will also be leaving Washington earlier than expected after a rocket from Gaza struck a house in Israel, was already facing indictment on bribery and other corruption charges. He now faces two related accusations:
The first is that he improperly authorized the sale of advanced German-made submarines to Egypt without the approval of top military officials, possibly at a cost to Israel’s national security. The second is that he engaged in self-dealing, through an undisclosed and enormously profitable financial stake in a company that supplied the German builder of both the Egyptian subs and several new Israeli warships.
The new scandal builds on an earlier one involving the multibillion-dollar purchase of submarines and missile boats from the same Germany manufacturer.
In November, the police recommended charges against four of Mr. Netanyahu’s confidants, including his cousin and personal lawyer, over corruption in buying the ships. Mr. Netanyahu was not named a suspect.
But state prosecutors are said to be considering opening yet another investigation over the latest revelations.
With Mr. Gantz’s allies in the Blue and White party pummeling the prime minister on television Saturday night over the new submarine scandal, Mr. Netanyahu hastily invited himself into the newsroom of Channel 12, a television station he ordinarily treats as a mortal adversary, for his first interview in several years. He was “on my way to the airport,” he said, and thought he “would stop by here and shatter this wave of lies.”
He insisted that his investments had been unrelated to his role in buying submarines for Israel, and that he had sold his stock in the company before those deals were made.
“The basic false claim is that I made money on the submarines,” he said. “That is a complete lie. I did not make a shekel.”
Far from putting the matter to rest, however, the 40-minute television appearance confirmed much of the recent reporting on the submarine scandal and raised troubling new questions.
Mr. Netanyahu confirmed that the company on whose shares he had turned a sevenfold profit, clearing more than $3 million, a year after returning to power as prime minister, was in the supply chain of the German shipyard that builds Israel’s submarines. He admitted, after dodging the question for some time, that it was he who had told the Germans that Israel would not object to the sale of advanced submarines to Egypt.
And he acknowledged keeping both Mr. Gantz, who was then the army chief of staff, and Moshe Yaalon, then the defense minister, out of the loop about that decision. Mr. Yaalon is now the No. 2 candidate of the Blue and White party.
“All of Netanyahu’s first-time revelations connect to one main suspicion,” wrote Amos Harel, the military analyst for Haaretz: “A cloud of conflict of interest hangs over him.”
Mr. Netanyahu asserted that the decision not to object to the sale of submarines to Egypt was based on “state secrets” that justified his failure to consult either the military chief of staff or the defense minister.
But in Washington on Sunday, Mr. Gantz dismissed Mr. Netanyahu’s state-secrets assertion as ludicrous.
“The sale of submarines, or to give permission to sell submarines to a neighboring state, this is not a special operation in the middle of the night,” he told reporters. “This is going to affect us for many years to come, and it cannot but take place through the formal channels.”
“It makes no sense,” he added. “Why do we have a National Security Council? Why do we have a Ministry of Defense? Why do we have a Ministry of Foreign Affairs? Why do we have so many official committees, if it comes to one of our most important strategic decisions, and we bypass them all by cousins and lawyers?”
This was not the story line Mr. Netanyahu was aiming for as he headed to Washington. His trip had been carefully orchestrated to remind Israelis, who overwhelmingly admire Mr. Trump, of how effectively Mr. Netanyahu has managed their relationship. At their Monday meeting, Mr. Trump is expected to sign a document formalizing the United States’ recognition of Israel’s sovereignty in the Golan Heights — a strategically important plateau that Israel captured from Syria in the Arab-Israeli War of 1967 but which under international law is considered occupied territory.
As an added bonus, the White House meeting is to take place on the same morning that Mr. Gantz takes the stage across Washington at the annual gathering of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, ensuring that Mr. Gantz’s big debut there is utterly eclipsed.
Mr. Netanyahu’s early departure means that he will abandon plans to take his turn addressing the Aipac meeting on Tuesday, and he will miss talks with congressional leaders and a dinner at the White House with Mr. Trump.
The Aipac appearance, a yearly ritual for Mr. Netanyahu at which he is accustomed to bathing in the applause of thousands of approving supporters of Israel, had threatened to expose him to some embarrassment. Aipac departed from its studious avoidance of internal Israeli politics recently, after Mr. Netanyahu brokered a deal to bring a racist right-wing party into the government if he is re-elected, by calling the party “reprehensible.”
Liberal Jews who object to Mr. Netanyahu’s policies and who are concerned that Israel is becoming a partisan issue in the United States, had been pointing to his appearance as a chance to protest. T’ruah, a rabbinical human-rights advocacy group, urged Jews attending the Aipac conference to walk out on Mr. Netanyahu’s speech, while a prominent rabbi, Rachel Timoner of Congregation Beth Elohim in Brooklyn, on Friday called on Democratic leaders to “sound the alarm against” Mr. Netanyahu’s policies from the Aipac stage.
