Malaysia’s King, an Unusual Monarch, Abruptly Leaves His Job
HONG KONG — Malaysia’s king resigned on Sunday, becoming the first monarch to abdicate in the country’s history.
The royal palace offered no explanation for why the king, Sultan Muhammad V of Kelantan, stepped down after serving only two years of a five-year term. It has also declined to comment on a widespread rumor that his departure was tied to his marriage to a former beauty queen in Russia during a recent medical leave.
But this much is clear: A king’s role in Malaysia has little parallel among the world’s monarchies.
The monarch’s position, officially the “yang di-pertuan agong,” rotates every five years among a group of hereditary sultans who are titular leaders of nine Malay states. (The other four states have governors instead.)
The power-sharing arrangement was developed when Malaysia became independent from Britain in 1957 and the sultans — who had previously ruled independently, with support from the British colonial authorities — needed to nominate a figurehead to rule over a newly federalized nation.
“They didn’t want to say one king was superior to the others,” said Serina Rahman, a visiting fellow at the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute in Singapore who studies rural Malaysia.
The Malaysian state allocates 13.5 million Malaysian ringgit, or nearly $3.3 million, for the king’s annual salary and expenses, according to recent government figures. Taxpayers foot that bill.
The king’s ceremonial duties include swearing in prime ministers and issuing royal pardons. Sultan Muhammad swore in Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad after he was returned to power last year — albeit only after a mysterious delay that put the nation on edge for a few hours.
He also agreed to pardon Anwar Ibrahim, a former deputy prime minister who had been convicted years earlier on sodomy charges in a case that Mr. Anwar’s supporters say was engineered by his political enemies.
The king’s position has always been largely ceremonial because the Malaysian Parliament and prime minister have a monopoly on administrative power. The monarchy’s powers were further curbed in the 1990s, when Mr. Mahathir, during his first stint as prime minister, pushed through constitutional amendments that limited sultans’ legal immunity and canceled their right to veto legislation.
Yet many in Malaysia see the king as the embodiment of the traditions of the country’s ethnic Malay Muslim majority, and the monarchy generally as a voice of objective reason, Dr. Rahman said. As a result, politicians often cultivate support from sultans as a way of wooing voters from the country’s Malay political base.
Sultans can also play at politics. In 2014, example, the sultan of Selangor chose not to endorse the chief minister nominated by the local government.
“Conventionally, it was well established that a constitutional monarch does no more than endorsing and formally appointing the nominated leader of a victorious parliamentary party or coalition to head a new government,” a group of political analysts 
