JCC bomb threat suspect Michael Kaydar used Bitcoin, Google Voice to hide identity
   The teen hoaxer arrested in the barrage of bomb threats against Jewish community centers reportedly used the cryptic currency Bitcoin and a disposable Google Voice line to cover his tracks. 
   Computer whiz Michael Kaydar — a 19-year-old with dual American and Israeli citizenship — went to great lengths to make himself virtually untraceable as he terrorized JCCs across the country for months, The Daily Beast reported. 
   The first phone calls he allegedly made back in January quickly traced back to a service called SpoofCard that lets users change what people see on their caller ID. But a subpoena sent to TelTech — the New Jersey company behind the SpoofCard technology — at first appeared to be a dead end, the website reported. 
   The suspect used Bitcoin to underwrite his devious deeds as well as a disposable Google Voice line set up with an alias, the Daily Beast reported. 
   Bitcoin is a virtual currency not registered to a government or regulated bank that can be easily exchanged for real money. 
   Kaydar reportedly paid for his SpoofCard with Bitcoin and used its voice-changing feature to make himself sound like a woman. 
   A break finally came when he finally slipped up by forgetting to route his internet connection through a dummy server, the Daily Beast said. 
   The teen — who is himself Jewish — was nabbed Thursday at his home in Ashkelon, a city on Israel's southern coast, after an international probe spearheaded by the FBI. 
   Jewish groups celebrated the arrest in the threats, which raised concerns of a rising wave of anti-Semitism. 
   Israeli police called the Kaydar a hacker — but said his motives remain unclear. 
   "He's the guy who was behind the JCC threats," Israeli police spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said, referring to the scores of anonymous calls phoned into Jewish community centers. 
   Kaydar shielded his face from photographers as guards escorted him out of a courtroom. 
   The teen's lawyer said his client suffers from a "very serious" medical condition that kept him out of school and the Israel Defense Forces — and may have affected his behavior. 
   "This is one of the things the judge told the police to check, to talk to his doctors, to get more documents and to investigate him according to his medical situation," said attorney Galit Bash. 
   Kaydar's father has also been detained for questioning, official said. 
   The motive for the bomb threat spree remains a mystery. Israeli police said he used sophisticated technology to disguise his voice and location when making the calls to centers in the U.S. as well as Australia and New Zealand. 
   Israeli authorities worked with the FBI and other international law enforcement to crack the case. 
   During his arrest, Kaydar tried to grab an officer's gun until another cop stopped him, officials said. 
   "Today's arrest in Israel is the culmination of a large-scale investigation spanning multiple continents for hate crimes against Jewish communities across our country," U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions said in a statement. 
   "The Department of Justice is committed to protecting the civil rights of all Americans, and we will not tolerate the targeting of any community in this country on the basis of their religious beliefs. I commend the FBI and Israeli National Police for their outstanding work on this case." 
   More than 150 Jewish centers and schools across America have been hit with bomb hoaxes this year - including three JCCs on Staten Island - with dozens sometimes coming in seemingly coordinated calls on a single day. 
   Juan Thompson, a disgraced former journalist who lost his job last year for fabricating stories, was arrested in St. Louis earlier this month for at least eight of the threats. Police said his wave of terror appeared to be a form of retaliation against an ex-lover. 
   President Trump faced fierce criticism in February for his apparent suggestion that Jews might be placing some of the threats to make others "look bad." 
   Only later did he condemn the threats. 
   With News Wire Services   
