Damien Cave emails readers of his Australia newsletter twice a month, providing behind-the-scenes insights, recommendations, and feedback from readers. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, sign-up here.
______
“The scientist cried when he saw the evidence” — that was the detail from our article about the death and bleaching of Australia’s magnificent Great Barrier Reef that a former New York Times colleague grabbed onto and tweeted out.
To some, the story was about climate change and the fragility of underwater ecosystems. To others, it was an emotional tale of life and avoidable death, of beauty lost to human failure. Our editors seemed to have both elements in mind; they pushed Justin Gillis and I to add more detail about why damage to the reef mattered, leading us to explain that the death of coral reefs worldwide could rob the world of not just colorful creatures, but also tourism income and human lives because of all the millions of people who get their protein primarily from reef fish.
That editorial challenge — how to make people think deeply about subjects that may seem dense, or just distant — can be found embedded in much of the best work The Times produces. (Nick Casey’s profile of Diego, the Galápagos tortoise saving his species with his formidable sex drive, is another marvel of science made shareable.)
And yet, there are often details that never get into even our most impactful efforts. In my experience, this is especially true for those that require a lot of explaining, as the reef story did.
For example, I didn’t get a chance to tell you that when Terry Hughes — the reef scientist at the heart of our story — flies over the Great Barrier Reef to conduct surveys, there is a lifeboat between the seats of the small charter plane he uses because they are flying so low and slow that the chance of crashing is severe.
I also didn’t get to include the fact that he told me he spent more than 30 hours in the air last year doing aerial surveys of the reef, all of which intensified the emotional response — the tears — that poured from him and his students as they assessed the full scale of the damage.
These are relatively minor outtakes. You can read more about the story and our climate change team in this Times Insider article. But hopefully, like that mention of the tears and those added paragraphs about what’s at stake, the added details will bring you closer to the story we tried to tell.
Should we share more of these back stories? Let us know whether this sort of thing works for you by emailing us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com — and feel free to offer any other suggestions for this newsletter or our expanding coverage of Australia.
Now here are a few other Times items that I found striking since our last newsletter, plus a recommendation from Kate Wild, whose work from the Northern Territory for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation is often hard to match.
______
You’ve seen the photos of President Rodrigo Duterte’s bloodied Philippines. Now meet the man in this deeply reported profile that includes comments from Mr. Duterte’s relatives about the abuse he suffered at the hands of his mother. “Violence in the house, violence in the school and violence in the neighborhood,” said his brother, Emmanuel Duterte. “That is why he is always angry. Because if you have pain when you are young, you are angry all the time.”
______
Some of you have told us you’re fans of The Daily, The Times’s politics and news podcast. So am I. And for those who don’t know, here’s a good introductory experience, featuring an especially rich bout of truth-telling and Trump challenging from James Comey, above, the head of the F.B.I. Hearing the actual voices, calm and serene, somehow makes it all even more fascinating.
______
Times obituaries are generally unmatched for their breadth, and we’ve seen quite a few titanic efforts over the past few days. I’d suggest starting with two: David Rockefeller and Chuck Berry. Then check out our list so far of notable deaths in 2017.
______
Our critics wade through mounds of cultural production, dreck included, so you don’t have to. Here are eight filmmakers to watch, courtesy of A. O. Scott and Manohla Dargis; and here are 11 books to read, thanks to our many erudite reviewers.
From Kate Wild of the ABC, who emailed to say:
“I’ve just come back from a couple of days in the Northern Territory and remembered an amazing documentary to add to your must-watch list if you haven’t seen it already — ‘Prison Songs,’ by Kelrick Martin. There’s a tiny clip of it here.”
“Kelrick was appointed the head of indigenous programming at the ABC a couple of years after it came out. He filmed ‘Prison Songs’ inside the NT’s largest prison just before it was decommissioned. The doco is a musical, all of the tracks were written by the inmates with the doco makers. It’s an incredible look at the NT through the prism of incarceration, and a much classier product than ‘Crocs in the Cabinet!’”
