Palestinian Rivals Talk Unity but Show Divisions
JERUSALEM — As the rival Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas began unity talks on Tuesday in Cairo, one detail stood out as emblematic of the challenges they face: The delegation representing Hamas is led by a man who has been accused of plotting to overthrow the president of the Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas.
If that awkward hurdle can be overcome, the talks would have at least the potential to end the decade-long, sometimes bloody schism between the two groups and reshape the region’s political map. The effort is being propelled to a great extent by the increasingly desperate humanitarian situation among the two million residents of Gaza.
That being said, few here think the two groups will bridge their differences.
From the outset, they are approaching the Egyptian-sponsored reconciliation process with divergent, and often mutually exclusive, ideas of where the talks should lead and even of what unity means.
The aging and unpopular Mr. Abbas, whose Palestinian Authority holds sway in part of the Israeli-occupied West Bank, hopes to wrest back control of the Gaza Strip from Hamas after a 10-year absence. Hamas says it has disbanded its administrative control of Gaza and relinquished all responsibility for civilian affairs there. But it sees unity as an opportunity to regain a foothold — and eventually take over — in the West Bank.
One major sticking point is who will control security in Gaza, where Hamas’s military wing has built up a formidable arsenal of thousands of rockets, missiles and drones, as well as a network of fortified tunnels, and has fought three wars against Israel.
Hamas says its maintenance of control over its “weapons of resistance” is nonnegotiable. But Mr. Abbas said he would not tolerate a Gaza version of “the Hezbollah model in Lebanon,” in which a heavily armed nonstate organization exerts influence over a weak government and hollowed-out national institutions.
“Reconciliation is something that none of the parties can afford,” said Ghassan Khatib, a Palestinian political scientist at Birzeit University in the West Bank.
“Hamas cannot change its politics in order to be part of the P.L.O.,” he said, referring to the Palestine Liberation Organization, the main Palestinian umbrella group also led by Mr. Abbas. At the same time, he said, “the P.L.O. cannot accept Hamas without it changing its policies, or it will lose its international recognition.”
In short, he concluded, “Hamas will not give up its military capabilities, its only source of power, and Abbas cannot accept the Lebanese model.”
Nevertheless, while numerous attempts at Palestinian unity have failed in the past, experts in the West Bank, Gaza Strip and Israel say this effort seems more serious. Hamas is under new leadership. The United States and other international players want to see the Palestinian Authority take charge of Gaza ahead of a possible resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. And all the parties, including Israel, are growing increasingly concerned about the humanitarian situation there.
Only limited aid can flow to the area as long as Hamas, considered a terrorist group by Israel, the United States and the European Union, is in control. A new influx of foreign assistance through the Palestinian Authority and a new regime for Gaza’s border crossings with Israel and Egypt, allowing for more movement of people and goods could, analysts say, alleviate the suffering and prevent an explosion.
“The lowest common denominator that everyone agrees on is the deteriorating situation in Gaza,” Mr. Khatib said. “What is most probably going to happen is much, much less than reconciliation, but some little bit of progress beyond the current reality.”
Last week Israel allowed a large delegation of government and security officials from the Palestinian Authority, led by Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah, to pass through its territory to hold a ceremonial cabinet meeting in Gaza as an early display of unity.
Given the many complexities, some analysts said that any celebrations over Mr. Hamdallah’s arrival in Gaza may have been premature.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, for one, warned that Israel was “not interested in a bogus reconciliation in which the Palestinian factions reconcile with each other at the expense of our existence.” He insisted, among other things, on Hamas dismantling its military wing and recognizing Israel.
Palestinian observers pointed to other ominous signs, like Mr. Hamdallah’s swift departure from Gaza and an apparent lack of enthusiasm from Mr. Abbas, who has not yet canceled the economic sanctions he imposed on Gaza to force Hamas to yield control.
“Rami Hamdallah went there as a kind of visitor or tourist, as if Ban Ki-moon was visiting,” said Zakaria al-Qaq, a Palestinian expert in national security at Al Quds University in East Jerusalem, referring to the former secretary-general of the United Nations. “As the days go by, the Palestinian Authority is adding more conditions.”
At first, Mr. Qaq said, Mr. Abbas merely demanded the dismantling of Hamas’s shadow government. “Now,” he said, “they are saying they have to renegotiate everything and are talking about Hezbollah and Hamas.”
But even if Mr. Abbas is reluctant to act as a subcontractor in solving Gaza’s troubles, the Palestinian public has long demanded unity and Mr. Abbas has publicly committed to trying to achieve it, though his representatives say it is likely to take some time.
“This is a long process,” Azzam al-Ahmad, the head of the Fatah delegation to Cairo, told the official Voice of Palestine radio on Tuesday. “We will discuss elections, the judiciary, security, the P.L.O., all of these things.”
The head of the Hamas delegation, Salah al-Arouri, is the newly-appointed deputy chief of the group’s political bureau. Currently living in exile, he was accused by Israel in 2014 of plotting a coup against Mr. Abbas.
Even if the talks accomplish little, an Israeli analyst said, they are still worth pursuing. “There is no tax on talking,” said Shalom Harari, a retired Israeli general and former senior adviser on Palestinian affairs to Israel’s Defense Ministry. Yet, he added, “the maximum that can be achieved is an interim arrangement with some changes at the crossings — a mini reconciliation.”
Talal Okal, a veteran political analyst in Gaza, said Hamas was trying to take on a more national role and to strengthen its relations with Egypt. “I think Hamas is ready for understandings about resistance here,” Mr. Okal said. “Nobody can remove their weapons and armaments, but they will find a way to put this aside for a while.”
Hamas says the current talks should be based on a reconciliation agreement reached in Cairo in 2011, which called for a unity government and legislative and presidential elections within a year.
But the crux of the problem, said Michael Herzog, an Israel-based fellow with The Washington Institute for Near East Policy who has participated in most of the Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations, is that Hamas and Fatah appeared to be going into the negotiations with different goals and visions.
“For Abbas, this is about Hamas giving up control of Gaza to the Palestinian Authority,” Mr. Herzog said. “The way Hamas sees it, it’s a two-way street. They give up some control of Gaza, but in return the West Bank opens up to them, they are allowed to operate there and this opens the way for Hamas to take over the Palestinian national movement.”
For Israel, the United States and other international players, the prospects of any peace process will depend on the outcome. “If the Authority takes full control of Gaza and can deliver Gaza, that will be a good thing,” Mr. Herzog said. “If Hamas ultimately becomes a dominant party in policy decisions on the Palestinian side, that’s a bad thing.”
