Philippine Communist Rebels Kill 6 Soldiers, Military Says
MANILA — Six soldiers were killed on Tuesday in the first major attack by Communist rebels in the Philippines since the 50th anniversary of their guerrilla movement last month, the military said.
The soldiers were checking on reports of guerrilla activity before dawn in the central island province of Samar when they struck an improvised land mine planted by rebels, said Col. Noel Detoyato, a spokesman for the army. He said an hourlong gun battle followed, during which soldiers believe some of the rebels were wounded.
“All of our casualties were caused by the improvised explosive device,” Colonel Detoyato said. “It was a powerful blast.” Six soldiers were wounded in addition to those killed, he said.
The New People’s Army, the armed wing of the underground Communist Party of the Philippines, claimed responsibility for the attack, saying it was carried out because the military “has a long and bloody trail of human rights violations” on Samar, a stronghold of the Communist movement. Samar was struck by a powerful earthquake on Tuesday afternoon.
The New People’s Army has been waging guerrilla warfare in the Philippines since 1969, making it one of the longest-running insurgencies in Asia. Last month, troops killed three rebels who had attacked a police station in Samar to mark the movement’s 50th anniversary.
President Rodrigo Duterte called off talks with the Communist rebels in 2017, after accusing them of continuously attacking government positions despite the peace efforts. He later agreed to hold back-channel talks to jump-start the negotiations, but last month he surprised officials in his government by declaring a “permanent termination” of the peace process until 2022, when his term is to end.
Last year, the government accused the New People’s Army and the Communist Party of working with opposition politicians to oust Mr. Duterte. The Communist Party’s founder, Jose Maria Sison, who is living in self-imposed exile in the Netherlands, denied that there was any such plot, and the military later said it had fizzled out soon after it was discovered.
Mr. Duterte, a self-described leftist, was once a university student of Mr. Sison’s. In announcing an end to peace talks last month, Mr. Duterte added the caveat that they could resume if Mr. Sison came home, assuring the rebel leader that he would personally look after him if he did so.
“I am not a traitor, I give you my word of honor,” Mr. Duterte said. “Let’s talk.”
