Hungary Sheltered a Fugitive Prime Minister. Did It Help Him Escape?
SKOPJE, Macedonia — As he awaited a ruling on his appeal against a corruption conviction, Nikola Gruevski, the former Macedonian prime minister, gave the impression that he was resigned to going to prison.
It was early November, and Mr. Gruevski contacted the prisons authority about conditions inside jail. He asked his bodyguards, allocated to him by the state, to buy him clothes to wear while incarcerated. He strolled around central Skopje as if savoring his last days as a free man.
But on the day he was finally told to report to jail, Mr. Gruevski vanished. He re-emerged four days later — but in Hungary, where he was soon granted political asylum by the far-right government of his political ally, Prime Minister Viktor Orban.
“It was like out of a movie,” said Vessela Tcherneva, deputy director of the European Council on Foreign Relations, a research group.
The escape has stirred fevered gossip and numerous conspiracy theories. But interviews with senior Macedonian officials have produced new details that suggest Mr. Gruevski was in contact with Hungarian officials in the final days before his escape. And Macedonian authorities are now investigating whether Mr. Gruevski was ferried across the border in a vehicle with Hungarian diplomatic plates.
Mr. Orban’s government has denied interfering in Macedonia’s internal affairs, or having any role in smuggling Mr. Gruevski out of the country. But by merely sheltering him, Mr. Orban is inserting himself into the fragile politics of the Balkans at a time when Macedonia is trying to join NATO and the European Union — efforts that Russia is trying to block.
The current Macedonian government is trying to complete a historic diplomatic deal with Greece that would remove the biggest obstacle to the country joining NATO and the European bloc after two decades of diplomatic limbo.
In January, Parliament is set to vote on changing the country’s name to the Republic of North Macedonia. Greece, which objects to the current name as implying territorial ambitions on a northern Greek region of the same name, would lift its veto of Macedonia’s accession in exchange.
Mr. Gruevski, who had been sentenced to two years in prison for receiving kickbacks on government contracts, had opposed the deal with Greece and allied himself with Russian President Vladimir V. Putin.
Though Mr. Gruevski left office in 2016 amid scandal, he has remained a central figure in Macedonian politics. His sudden departure and reappearance in Hungary have raised potential hurdles in the delicate negotiations before the parliamentary vote, and have added a highly destabilizing element to the debate.
By granting Mr. Gruevski asylum in Hungary, Mr. Orban may have primarily been acting out of personal loyalty to a kindred spirit, said Ms. Tcherneva, an expert on Balkan politics.
“But he has nothing against the collateral damage,” Ms. Tcherneva said. “Orban does not hide his sympathy for Putin and Trump, and the destruction of the version of the West that we used to know.”
Since entering office in 2010, Mr. Orban has morphed from a marginal player in European politics into the Continent’s leading nationalist voice. After eroding democratic institutions at home, he rose to international prominence during the refugee crisis of 2015, when he called for the European Union to take a stronger stance against migrants, while advocating for an end to the liberal values and institutions on which the bloc was founded.
And as Macedonia became a key way station along the migration trail through the Balkans, Mr. Gruevski and Mr. Orban grew close. They share
