Trump and Kim Started With Dinner and Praise. They Ended Without a Handshake.
HANOI, Vietnam — It was an unlikely bromance that began last summer in Singapore. The relationship seemed ready to blossom even more this week in Vietnam — until, suddenly, the date went sour.
President Trump, who prides himself on his negotiating skills, began his second summit meeting with Kim Jong-un — the North Korean dictator who is believed to have ordered the killings of both his own uncle and half brother — with ardent wooing.
“I think very importantly, the relationship is, you know, just very strong,” Mr. Trump said on Thursday morning as he sat with Mr. Kim before a phalanx of cameras at the Metropole Hotel in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital. “And when you have a good relationship, a lot of good things happen.”
Mr. Kim, for his part, was equally gushing as he said that “nearly all of the world” was watching and was “probably thinking that they are seeing a scene from a fantasy movie now that they are seeing us spending wonderful time together facing each other.”
As Mr. Trump spoke glowingly of North Korea’s economic potential, the two men seemed to mirror each other in body language. Both sat slightly forward in their chairs, one hand on one knee and the other leaning casually on the table between them, prompting analysts in South Korea to extrapolate closer and closer ties.
“This demonstrates that the relationship between the two has developed from that of negotiating partners to collaborators,” said Kim Yo-jong, an expert in nonverbal language who was interviewed on Channel A News in Seoul (and is no relation to Mr. Kim’s sister, who shares the same name and traveled with her brother to the Vietnam meeting).
But just a few hours later, both men had abruptly pulled out of a planned lunch, leaving elegant place settings in a restaurant at the Metropole untouched.
There would be no deal, and what had started as a day of harmony ended with both leaders speeding off in their motorcades with nary a final handshake for the cameras.
It may not have matched the theatrics of the first meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim last June in Singapore, when Mr. Kim took a nighttime walk through the city center (and posed for selfies with the Singaporean foreign minister), and Mr. Trump showed Mr. Kim a slick Hollywood-style video on an iPad, touting the promising future he says awaits the North if it gives up its nuclear arms.
Still, the sudden change of tone over a matter of hours on Thursday in Hanoi provided the kind of unpredictable sparks for which both men have come to be known.
There were even a few surprises before the talks broke down.
The day before Mr. Trump’s meeting with Mr. Kim, the White House press corps was kicked out of the hotel where Mr. Kim was staying, indicating that the North Korean leader and his authoritarian hosts in Vietnam might try to curtail press freedom. Tensions with journalists were further stoked on Wednesday night when four reporters were barred from covering the kickoff dinner — not by Mr. Kim, but by the White House.
The next day, Mr. Kim may have made history by answering not just one but three questions from foreign reporters.
In the morning photo session on Thursday, Mr. Kim stunned the room and became an immediate sensation on social media when he answered a question from David Nakamura, a Washington Post reporter, about whether he was confident he would get a deal.
“It’s too early to say,” Mr. Kim said through his interpreter. “I would not say I’m pessimistic.”
During a later meeting between the leaders and their teams of negotiators, Mr. Kim answered two more questions from the news media. Asked about his willingness to denuclearize his country, Mr. Kim said, “If I’m not willing to do that, I wouldn’t be here right now.” Mr. Trump replied, “That might be the best answer you’ve ever heard.”
But by lunchtime, when the leaders were scheduled to continue their discussions as they ate, it appeared that analysts might have read too much into the apparent conviviality.
Mr. Trump also faced a major distraction in the form of congressional testimony from Michael Cohen, his former lawyer and fixer, who accused the president of a pattern of lies and criminality spanning years. Earlier this week, Mr. Trump said on Twitter that Mr. Cohen was “lying in order to reduce his prison time,” and then he retweeted himself on Thursday not long before his meeting with Mr. Kim.
There was some speculation that Mr. Cohen’s testimony had so irked Mr. Trump that he had cut short the meeting. Certainly, when word arrived from the traveling press pool that the lunch had been delayed and then canceled, along with a planned signing ceremony for a joint declaration, reporters scrambled to figure out what had happened and why.
In the international media center less than a mile from the Metropole, reporters frantically refreshed their Twitter feeds, seeking updates from their colleagues in the travel pool or looking for statements from the White House. Word came that Mr. Trump would hold a news conference almost two hours earlier than scheduled.
Outside the Metropole, Mr. Trump’s motorcade pulled out. Black-suited North Korean security officers dashed into a line of black Toyota hatchbacks, a few of them jumping through the doors of cars that had already begun to roll.
At the media center, slight mayhem broke out when reporters from a Japanese news network started to interview a reporter from Voice of America. Other reporters, thinking she was a White House spokeswoman, rushed over. Suddenly, a scrum of microphones and cellphones was thrust at the reporter.
One of the reporters who had joined the crowd realized it was a case of hacks interviewing each other. “You’re just journalists?” she said in disgust. “Oh, my God, why did I run over here?” She stormed away.
At Mr. Trump’s news conference on Thursday, he was clearly not as ebullient as he had been in Singapore, where he had answered questions for more than an hour and made an impromptu policy announcement when he said he would be suspending military exercises between United States and South Korean forces.
But he remained emphatic that he and Mr. Kim were still on good terms. “I think the relationship is very warm,” he said. “And when we walked away, it was a very friendly walk.”
There was no immediate way to confirm the statement.
