Gunmen Attack Hazara Miners in Afghanistan, Killing at Least 9
KABUL, Afghanistan — Gunmen in northern Afghanistan ambushed ethnic Hazara coal miners on Friday, shooting at least nine of them dead and seemingly adding to a string of recent attacks singling out ethnic or sectarian minorities.
The attack happened in the district of Tala Wa Barfak in Baghlan Province, a hub for coal-mining in northern Afghanistan. The miners were on a bus returning home to central Daykondi Province, according to Faiz Muhammed Amiri, the district governor of Tala Wa Barfak.
“We don’t know who the attackers were, but the Anar Dara area, where it happened, is an insecure area, and antigovernment elements are highly active in the area,” Mr. Amiri said. “The people who were killed are from Daykondi Province, and I think all of them are Hazara.”
Hazaras, most of whom are Shiite Muslims, have a long history of being abused in Afghanistan and have particularly suffered at the hands of the Taliban.
But on Friday, a spokesman for the Taliban denied they were behind the attack, saying the area where it took place was not under their control. “We don’t have any connection with the incident in Baghlan Province; we are sad for those who lost their lives,” said the spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid.
While most accounts put the number dead at nine, different officials and local elders put the figure anywhere from seven to 13 people.
Arbab Muhammed Rasoul, an elder in Barfak village who went to help collect the bodies, said two gunmen on a motorcycle stopped the bus and forced off all of the passengers, who were 25 to 40 years old, before opening fire on them.
“We put all the dead bodies in a room in Barfak village and will send them to Daykondi tomorrow,” Mr. Rasoul said.
Chaman Ali, a relative of one of the workers killed in the attack, said three people survived by jumping into a river. “They had just received their salaries and they were happy because they were heading home,” Mr. Ali said.
Mine workers in Tala Wa Barfak make about $10 a day, relatives said.
Some of the local officials suspected that Islamic State affiliates, who have claimed responsibility for other deadly attacks against Hazaras, were behind the killings. Samiuddin Nazer, a member of Baghlan’s provincial council, said officials had received reports of an Islamic State presence in Tala Wa Barfak about six months ago.
But Gen. Noor Habib Gulbahari, the province’s police chief, played down such suggestions.
“Some people were saying that the attackers were I.S. members, but we did not have any intelligence about the presence of I.S. in Baghlan before this,” General Gulbahari said.
