From Siberia, an Unlikely Cry  ‘We Need Greenpeace Out Here!’
TAS-YURYAKH, Russia — At a truck stop at the northern terminus of the Vilyui ice highway in northeastern Siberia, drivers make small talk not about life on the road but rather the life of the road.
It might last another week, suggested one driver casually, tucking into a steaming plate of meatballs.
“Not likely,” countered Maxim A. Andreyevsky, 31, the driver of a crude oil tanker truck. “Didn’t you see the shimmer on the surface? It will be gone in a day or two.”
Every spring, thousands of miles of so-called winter highway in Russia, mostly serving oil and mining towns in Siberia and far northern European Russia, melt back into the swamps from which they were conjured up the previous fall. And every year, it seems to the men whose livelihoods depend upon it, the road of ice melts earlier.
That insight has turned Tas-Yuryakh, a tiny village of log cabins that depends on the ice highway for business at its truck stop and gas station — the last gas for 508 miles — into a hotbed of true believers in the human contribution to climate change.
“Of course people are to blame,” Mr. Andreyevsky said. “They pump so much gas, they pump so much oil. Brother, we need Greenpeace out here.”
With highways made of ice, including the icy surfaces of deep lakes and rivers, all it takes is one pleasantly warm spring day for the highway to vanish. Every year, officials say, at least one big rig goes through the ice of a lake or big river.
“The danger is always with the daring truck drivers,” said Aleksandr A. Kondratyev, the director of the regional department of roads in Mirny, a diamond-mining town in northeastern Siberia linked to the rest of Russia to the south only by the Vilyui ice road. Most of the time, he said, they escape with their lives.
When the Vilyui ice highway first opened in 1976, its builders celebrated the occasion on Revolution Day, Nov. 7, Mr. Kondratyev said. These days, the road rarely opens before mid-December, he said, and it now typically closes on April 1, about a month earlier than it used to.
For truck drivers in this part of Siberia, The Plate, the truck stop that marks the Vilyui highway’s northern end, is an island of comfort in a sea of snow.
Drivers stepped in, kicked snow off their boots and lined up at a counter to order their last restaurant meal for three days, the typical time it takes to drive over the ice to the next gravel road. Outside, a skinny, angry Siberian husky tied to a tree barked fiercely at anybody who came near.
Ice highways are integral to Russia’s mining and oil economy in the Far North, as they are in Canada and Alaska, where ice roads are also freezing later and melting earlier.
The highways are surfaced with ice either graded by a bulldozer from frozen swamp or formed by spraying river water onto the intended site of the road and allowing it to freeze.
The winter roads take shortcuts across frozen lakes and rivers but mostly traverse permafrost, the layer of frozen, prehistoric swamp that when melted resembles frozen spinach after a spell in the microwave.
Permafrost is mostly composed of mud and vegetation but includes the occasional frozen mammoth. It is typically hundreds of yards deep, and in places in Siberia penetrates nearly a mile into the earth, rendering it impossible to dig down to bedrock to 
