A lack of leadership and a reluctance to move aggressively against potential attackers are responsible for the worst spate of United Nations peacekeeping fatalities in the organization’s history, according to a report released on Monday.
If adopted, the recommendations of the unusually blunt report could significantly increase the prospects for use of deadly force by United Nations peacekeepers. Roughly 110,000 blue-helmeted soldiers and police officers from a range of countries are deployed in the organization’s 15 peacekeeping missions around the world, entrusted with the responsibility of protecting civilians.
“Overall, the United Nations and troop-and-police-contributing countries need to adapt to a new reality: the blue helmet and the United Nations flag no longer offer ‘natural’ protection,” stated the report, which was posted on the United Nations website.
“Unfortunately, hostile forces do not understand a language other than force,” it stated. “To deter and repel attacks and to defeat attackers, the United Nations needs to be strong and not fear to use force when necessary.”
It warned that without willingness by the United Nations and the contributor countries to “change their mind-set, take risks and show a willingness to face these new challenges, they will be consciously sending troops into harm’s way.”
The report is a response to what United Nations officials have called the most lethal five-year period for the global organization’s peacekeeping soldiers and police officers, mostly in unstable parts of Africa like Mali, Central African Republic and Democratic Republic of Congo.
Since 2013, at least 195 United Nations peacekeeping personnel have been killed in violent acts. In 2017 alone, at least 56 were killed, the worst annual tally in nearly a quarter-century.
The report’s recommendations include instituting a far more robust military response to armed threats, including a willingness to strike first and to face attackers where they lurk, rather than waiting for them behind the walls of peacekeeper bases.
The report also urges use of sophisticated equipment to fight at night, improved training of soldiers and police officers from the contributor countries, and better intelligence about the deadly menaces that have chronically caught United Nations peacekeepers off guard at their most vulnerable outposts.
The report was prepared for Secretary General António Guterres by Lt. Gen. Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, a retired Brazilian military officer with 40 years of experience. His postings have included force commander of the United Nations peacekeeping mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo, known by its acronym Monusco, the organization’s largest peacekeeping operation and one of its most hazardous.
Mr. Guterres asked General dos Santos Cruz two months ago to lead a high-level review of United Nations peacekeeping because of the spike in casualties.
A few weeks after that appointment was announced, at least 15 peacekeepers from Tanzania were killed by militants in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, near the Uganda border. That assault was the single deadliest against any United Nations peacekeeping force since 22 Pakistani soldiers were killed in Somalia in 1993.
General dos Santos Cruz was unsparing in his critique. The executive summary of his report, titled “Nobody attacks a stronger opponent,” faulted what he called “a deficit of leadership” that he said had prevented the peacekeeping forces from adapting to the reality that they are targets.
“Fatalities rarely occur as a result of troops and leadership taking action,” he wrote. “The United Nations is most often attacked as a result of inaction.”
Rather than defaulting to a defensive posture, his report said, peacekeeping missions “should go where the threat is, in order to neutralize it.”
The general wrote that peacekeeping missions should also “push combat to the night, to take advantage of their superior technology” and that they must have equipment including armored vehicles, special rifles for snipers, night-vision capability and laser-guided aim.
Waiting defensively, he admonished, “only gives freedom to hostile forces to decide when, where and how to attack the United Nations.”
The general also said peacekeeping bases should be surrounded by “a clearly defined security zone” in which the civilian populace knows “it is an area with ‘zero tolerance’ for the presence of armed groups.”
The implications of the report add to the challenges facing the under secretary general for peacekeeping operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix of France, a longtime diplomat who was appointed to the post nearly a year ago.
Mr. Lacroix also is contending with a legacy of sexual abuse allegations against some peacekeeping units in Africa and pressure from the United States, the biggest single funder of peacekeeping operations, for less spending and more efficiency.
Last June, the Trump administration’s ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki R. Haley, bragged on Twitter that under her tenure the Americans had cut more than a half-billion dollars from the annual peacekeeping budget, which totals about $6.7 billion, and that “we’re only getting started.”
It remains unclear whether Mr. Guterres will adopt General dos Santos Cruz’s recommendations.
United Nations peacekeeping officials, who decided to publicly release the report, also released a summary of what they described as an “action plan” to improve peacekeeper security.
It included safety and security audits of “all deployments,” identifying units with “significant performance issues,” and assessing equipment shortages and “impact on safety and security.”
Longer-term goals, the summary said, include a reassessment of deployments in especially dangerous hot spots, more intelligence gathering and specialized training to “address performance issues.”
