In Russian Plane Crash, Investigators Look at Pilot Error, Equipment Failure and Weather
MOSCOW — Russian investigators looking into the fiery crash landing of an Aeroflot jet in Moscow, an accident that killed at least 40 people in full view of hundreds at the country’s main airport, were focusing Monday on pilot error, equipment failure and bad weather as possible causes.
After the plane skidded to a stop on Sunday at Sheremetyevo International Airport, Russian news media reported that some passengers had insisted on grabbing their carry-on bags before leaving the burning wreckage — a violation of basic emergency protocol that would have slowed the evacuation. Videos posted online showed people walking away from the jet with luggage.
As the scale of the disaster emerged, many Russians reacted with outrage at the initial, soothing reports on state media and in a statement from the airline that had suggested that all aboard had survived the jet fuel inferno.
The Aeroflot flight took off from Moscow on Sunday evening bound for Murmansk, a port city in northern Russia. Pilots signaled distress soon after takeoff, the news agency Interfax reported, and the plane circled back for an emergency landing.
Officials said on Monday that both flight data recorders had been retrieved, and local news outlets reported that the Investigative Committee of Russia, a law enforcement agency, was looking at the inexperience of the pilots, along with mechanical or weather-related problems, as possible contributing factors.
Flightradar24, a site that tracks transponders on planes, showed the aircraft, a Sukhoi Superjet, flying in a loop around the airport before returning. The jet bounced on touchdown and then came down again, hard, and burst into flames. The Russian health minister, Veronika I. Skvortsova, said on Monday that 40 people had died; late Sunday, officials had said that there were 41 victims.
Videos showed the plane skidding along the runway with its nose angled upward, its main landing gear apparently collapsed, its engines and fuselage scraping the ground and flames streaking out behind. Later, flames spread on the tarmac, suggesting that fuel was leaking and burning, as passengers descended the inflatable emergency slides and fled the wreck.
On Monday, Interfax cited an unidentified official saying that investigators believed lightning had struck the plane. “According to the main version, at an altitude of about two kilometers, the crew signaled an emergency because of a lightning strike and the failure of the radio and other electronics.”
Lightning strikes airliners thousands of times a year, but it rarely causes even minor problems, because modern planes are designed to withstand it. Pilots generally avoid thunderstorms and typically would have instruments aboard to navigate clear of them. A website posting weather information showed a thunderstorm about 15 miles north of the Sheremetyevo airport as the jet flew in that area at the time.
Interfax said the pilots then landed with full fuel tanks because they could not coordinate with the tower to “maneuver to discard” the jet fuel. It was unclear whether the pilots would have dumped the fuel or circled to burn it off.
Using a transponder to send coded signals, the pilots first indicated that their radio had failed — a problem, though not usually a severe one — and then, just four minutes before landing, communicated that they had an emergency on board, the radio station Echo of Moscow reported.
Another Russian radio station, Kommersant FM, reported that some passengers had slowed the evacuation by insisting on retrieving their hand luggage from overhead, even as those behind them clamored to exit the burning plane. As passengers groped for baggage, a lethal 
