A French Campaign Waged Online Adds a Wild Card to the Election
PARIS — In Fiscal Kombat, an online video game introduced this month by the presidential campaign of Jean-Luc Mélenchon, France’s far-left candidate, players shake down men in suits to put money into the public coffers, Robin Hood-style. It’s one way Mr. Mélenchon, 65, has been winning over young voters.
His campaign has been gaining steam not only because of his energized rallies — he sometimes beams in by hologram to address multiple cities at once — and his platform. He has also been far more web savvy than his rivals, running what may be France’s first viral campaign.
It’s a wild-card factor all the more potent and vital since neither he nor the centrist candidate Emmanuel Macron, the front-runner by a narrow margin, represents a traditional political party or has its infrastructure.
When French voters go to the polls on Sunday for the first round of elections, they will do so after a campaign that has moved beyond rallies and other traditional events and migrated online for the first time. With some polls showing as many as 30 percent of the voters still undecided, every vote will count — and so will every “like.”
Far-right websites, an ecosystem often referred to as the Fachosphère, have long given oxygen to Marine Le Pen’s far-right National Front, which was the first French party to create a website. And the left has traditionally had intense ideological debates in the mainstream news media.
In this campaign, however, in which the left is split among several candidates, Mr. Mélenchon, a former Trotskyite and longtime Socialist senator before breaking ranks, has more YouTube followers than any rival and a league of active online supporters eager to jump on critics.
“Marine Le Pen has made an effort for years: It’s a sociological vote; it’s a crisis; it’s people who feel shut out of the system,” said Thierry Vedel, a political scientist who conducts election research at Sciences Po, a university in Paris. “Mélenchon is more complicated. Mélenchon’s campaign is trying. We can’t rule out that in the campaign, social media has had an effect.”
That’s especially true on the left, where voters are deciding among Mr. Mélenchon; Mr. Macron, a 39-year-old centrist, former banker and finance minister under President François Hollande, a Socialist; and Benoît Hamon, a Socialist who comes from the party’s leftist wing and whose flagging campaign represents that party’s implosion.
Enter the video game. The idea for Fiscal Kombat came from Mr. Mélenchon’s grass-roots supporters, who created an online community, Le Discord Insoumis, or “Defiant Discord” — using the Discord gaming software — to debate ideas and find new ways to push his program. That program includes taking France out of NATO, renegotiating its treaties with the European Union, eliminating nuclear power, raising taxes and capping wages.
In the final weeks of the campaign, those supporters have been out in force. When the satirical cartoonist Joann Sfar took to his own Facebook page, which has 33,000 followers, to criticize Mr. Mélenchon, he was attacked by Mélenchon supporters.
Mr. Sfar wrote in Le Monde this past week that he had actually intended to vote for Mr. Mélenchon but changed his mind after the attacks.
“Obama won going door to door. Mélenchon has managed to create a kind of numerical door-to-door, to stir up his base on the internet since he’s moved people with very strong speeches,” said Vincent Glad, a journalist for the left-wing daily Libération who covers the intersection of social media and politics.
“That creates a dynamic in the country that we haven’t seen before,” he added. “People are really keyed up and comment a lot.”
In contrast, Mr. Macron has used the internet in a more traditional way: publishing speeches on his website and putting out information about rallies. But in a first for France, his campaign has deployed an American-style campaign tactic: using software to identify pockets of undecided voters to try to win them over.
Mr. Mélenchon, who has a history of sparring with the mainstream news media, has taken it up a notch, using the internet to bypass rules governing equal media exposure. He now has about 307,000 subscribers to his YouTube channel and 927,000 Facebook followers (compared with 1.3 million for Ms. Le Pen).
He delivers long speeches on YouTube, and some clips of his media appearances have had as many as five million views. His fans have set up a web page with pro-Mélenchon graphics and GIFs for easy sharing online.
He also has the support of a new generation of online political commentators. Usul, a homegrown Marxist YouTube political commentator, gave his implicit endorsement. Osons Causer, a left-wing YouTube outlet that loosely translates as Dare to Discuss and that produced some of the most viewed videos in France this election season, backed him on Friday. (Both Osons Causer and Usul have been making videos this election season for the muckraking left-wing news outlet Mediapart.)
Osons Causer and Usul are no fans of Mr. Hamon, the socialist, but they seem to have particular antipathy toward Mr. Macron, whom they see as the establishment candidate, a dynamic not unlike how supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders viewed his Democratic presidential rival, Hillary Clinton.
Last Sunday, Osons Causer, which usually features Ludo Torbey, one of the site’s founders, sitting in his bedroom talking viewers through complex topics on politics and economics, published a video, “If You’re Hesitating About Voting for Macron, Watch This.” It was harshly critical of the candidate’s economic policies and his efforts to overhaul the French labor market under Mr. Hollande. By Saturday afternoon, it had been viewed 6.6 million times on the group’s Facebook page.
In addition, the video “Who Really Is Emmanuel Macron?” was the most shared one in France from early February to early March, according to a study by Linkfluence, a French firm that monitors social media impact.
“It’s our moment,” said Stéphane Lambert, one of three founders of Osons Causer, who are 28 to 30 years old and attended Paris’s Lycée Henri IV, as did Mr. Macron. Started in June 2015 (the third founder is Xavier Cheung), the show has nearly 500,000 Facebook followers, up from 400,000 in January. (Le Monde, France’s paper of record, has three million.)
Usul agrees. “A lot of young people are trying to discover Socialism,” he said by telephone. Even if Mr. Mélenchon loses, “we’ve entered a phase when social movements will be more important, more structured, more radical,” he said, citing Spain’s leftist Podemos party as a model. “We’ll move from defense to attack.”
(In one of the more surreal twists, Usul is the pseudonym of a 31-year-old journalist in Lyon who has never revealed his name.)
These YouTubers haven’t exactly replaced the mainstream media in France, but they’ve gone viral in ways that more established media outlets have not.
“The mechanics of ‘virality’ on Facebook allows a form of inequality between different media,” said Guilhem Fouetillou, a founder of Linkfluence, which he said had sold its software to more than one of the five top candidates. “You don’t need an audience a priori; sharing something on Facebook lets you create an audience that’s also as important as the old media,” he added.
There are outliers. One newspaper without a website has played an outsize role in the election: the satirical print weekly Le Canard Enchaîné. In January, it broke the story that accused François Fillon, the center-right candidate, of putting his wife and children on the public payroll, leading to embezzlement charges that have dogged his campaign.
But social media kept the scandal alive — so much so that Mr. Fillon was the candidate most discussed online, according to Linkfluence.
Even though social media has helped bolster Mr. Mélenchon’s campaign, Mr. Vedel, of Sciences Po, warned against drawing too direct a line between social media activity and electoral results.
“Today, social media doesn’t always reflect opinion; that’s the problem,” he said. He added that much chatter during the campaign could be “filter bubbles,” in which people share information that reinforces their own ideas.
The Google News Lab in Paris, a division of the search engine company, found that the most searched candidates in recent weeks were Mr. Macron and Mr. Mélenchon. Among the top questions: “Is Emmanuel Macron left or right?” and “Why vote for Mélenchon?”
Of the searches for Ms. Le Pen this past week, the top question: “Why not vote for Le Pen?”
