Do U.S. Strikes Send a ‘Message’ to Rivals? There’s No Evidence
In the Trump administration’s telling, its missile strike on a Syrian airfield and its dropping of the so-called mother of all bombs over Afghanistan were more than military missions.
They were a signal of American resolve, and of President Trump’s willingness to use force, that would deter adversaries worldwide.
“The world witnessed the strength and resolve of our new president in actions taken in Syria and Afghanistan,” Vice President Mike Pence said in a speech in South Korea, adding, “North Korea would do well not to test his resolve.”
Sebastian Gorka, a deputy assistant to the president, went further, saying the American attack on a Syrian air base served as a warning to leaders in Russia, Iran and North Korea: “With just one strike, that message was sent to all those capitals, all those people.”
The notion that military action in one part of the world will deter adversaries in all others, long common in stump speeches and on cable news chatter, has at times profoundly influenced American foreign policy.
There is only one problem: Repeated investigation has found that this notion is baseless.
Jonathan Mercer, a University of Washington political scientist who studies so-called signaling in foreign policy, said this line of reasoning “drives me crazy.”
His entire field of study, he added, had never found evidence that would support the administration’s claims.
Jennifer Lind, a Dartmouth College political scientist, said those claims relied on a set of assumptions about resolve and credibility that, though widely held in Washington, had been extensively debunked.
“If someone says, ‘Because we dropped the MOAB, North Korea will think again before they mess with us,’ this is just that person’s intuition,” she said, referring to the bomb used in Afghanistan. She added, “There’s no theory or evidence there.”
Signals, Dr. Mercer said, can work — when they are precise and are backed up by action demonstrating capability and intent to follow through.
For instance, the American pledge to defend South Korea from a North Korean invasion is made credible by basing thousands of troops in the likely line of fire. Those troops are part of the signal.
North Korea considers this credible not because of a vague sense that American leaders hold to their word or are personally tough, but from demonstrable cause and effect. North Korea knows that an invasion would kill those American troops, which would force the United States to counterattack.
The administration seems to be operating on a much looser theory of signaling: that strikes in Syria or Afghanistan will create a global reputation for Mr. Trump’s resolve and willingness to use force, granting greater American leverage over all adversaries.
Mr. Pence has suggested this extends even to body language. He told The Washington Post of his decision to step outside during a visit to the demilitarized zone between South and North Korea: “I thought it was important that people on the other side of the DMZ see our resolve in my face.”
But Dr. Lind and Dr. Mercer said research on signaling has found several reasons that this view doesn’t hold up.
One problem is that it is not clear what the strikes in Syria and Afghanistan are intended to say to adversaries like North Korea and Russia.
Are they threats that the United States will use military force against those states as well, or just that Mr. Trump is temperamentally inclined to use force? If they are threats of force, under what circumstances would additional force be carried out?
While ambiguity can be useful in foreign policy in some situations, action intended to change an adversary’s calculus needs to clear a higher bar, research suggests. States tend to disregard any signals they cannot read, instead relying on signals about which they are more sure.
If Americans cannot agree about the message intended by striking Syria, Dr. Mercer said, faraway North Korean or Russian leaders will not have any clearer sense.
The American strikes in Syria and Afghanistan bear little resemblance to any conceivable plan for attacking North Korea, either in terms of how the operation would work or the dangers it would face, leaving analysts puzzled at suggestions that the former demonstrated a willingness to conduct the latter.
Lawrence Freedman, emeritus professor of war studies at King’s College London, wrote on Twitter that both were “low-risk strikes with limited impact,” adding that it was “incredible to suggest” that these were comparable to the “risks/consequences of action against N. Korea.”
Even if adversaries can deduce the signal’s meaning, that does not mean they will believe it. States, according to research by Robert Jervis, a Columbia University political scientist, are biased toward assuming other states’ behavior will remain consistent. To overcome that bias and force a state like North Korea to change its assessment of American intentions would require a more concrete signal.
If Mr. Pence hoped to imply that the United States might bomb North Korea as it had Afghanistan, his message was undercut by a stream of signals that conveyed, in the far clearer terms of action, that Washington would seek to avoid a war with North Korea as it always had.
The disposition of American troops in nearby Japan or Guam, the tenor of relations with South Korea, and dozens of other day-to-day American actions all send signals. Virtually all suggest that American policy remains unchanged.
This week’s story of the lost American aircraft carrier, Dr. Mercer said, demonstrates how hard it is to change an adversary’s calculus. When Mr. Trump claimed a carrier was racing toward the Korean Peninsula to deter Pyongyang, but photos later showed the carrier heading in the opposite direction, did this undermine American credibility?
For better or worse, Dr. Mercer suggested, foreign leaders will most likely see it as confirming whatever they already believed about American commitments under Mr. Trump.
“Think of it like a Rorschach test,” Dr. Mercer said, adding that the episode was “so strange that everyone can read into whatever they like or find most plausible.”
The administration’s claims appear premised on the belief that nations and leaders have reputations that apply globally. If the United States proves its resolve in one context, the thinking goes, this will give it greater credibility everywhere.
But repeated studies have found no evidence for this belief.
A 1984 Yale University study examined 54 instances in which a country’s pledge to defend an ally was tested. If reputation mattered, then countries that stood down would face more challengers in the future, and countries that followed through would face fewer challengers. But the study found no such correlations, suggesting that reputation played no role in determining how adversaries behaved.
Dr. Mercer, in 2013, published a study using similar metrics to determine whether individual leaders have reputations that shape how adversaries respond.
“Broad and deep evidence dispels that notion,” Dr. Mercer concluded. “As the record shows, reputations do not matter.”
Dr. Lind said studies had found that “one’s reputation for keeping past threats and promises does not affect credibility of threats and promises even in the same region.”
There is “no evidence,” she added, “that dropping a bomb in location A affects credibility in location A, let alone location B.”
These notions predate the Trump administration and have contributed to some of the most consequential miscalculations in modern American foreign policy.
In the 1950s, American policy makers believed it necessary to intervene in the Korean War, in part, to prove their willingness to stand up for European allies. Historical examination later showed that European and Soviet leaders saw the intervention as irrelevant to American pledges in Europe.
A generation later, policy makers concluded that intervening in Vietnam would signal American resolve and deter communist ambitions globally. Soviet records, released decades later, showed Moscow considered the intervention baffling and of no bearing on its policies.
Even policy makers who are aware of these misconceptions have struggled to signal successfully.
Charles A. Duelfer, a senior State Department official during Iraq’s 1990 invasion of Kuwait and the subsequent American intervention, was an author of a study with Stephen Benedict Dyson, a political scientist, on how the United States and Iraq had stumbled into conflict.
The war, they found, was largely a result of miscommunication. Saddam Hussein, Iraq’s leader, believed he had signaled his intention to invade Kuwait and received no red light from the United States, which he considered a partner. The Americans misread his signals, as well as the calculus, clear in retrospect, that led him into Kuwait.
Mr. Duelfer and Mr. Dyson wrote that the episode highlighted the difficulty of signaling across nations as well as the stakes of getting it wrong, which they conclude happens frequently and sometimes with catastrophic consequences.
Even under the best of circumstances, Dr. Mercer said, “Signals rarely speak for themselves.”
