Judge’s Copy of ‘Lady Chatterley’s Lover’ Is to Stay in U.K.
LONDON — It was the book that challenged Britain to face its conservatism. 
“Lady Chatterley’s Lover,” by D.H. Lawrence, with its racy depictions of sex between an aristocratic woman and her gamekeeper, was the subject of a trial in 1960 that would test the country’s newly relaxed rules against obscene publications.
The publisher, Penguin Books, won the case, a victory that heralded an era of greater freedom of expression at the dawn of the 1960s. And at the center of the trial was the judge’s copy of the novel, complete with the raunchy parts annotated for him by his wife.
That copy was sold to a private buyer in the United States at a Sotheby’s auction in October last year, prompting fears that the item would leave the country.
But after a crowdfunding campaign and a temporary government ban on the export of the book, Bristol University announced on Monday that it had acquired the copy. 
Philippe Sands, the president of English PEN, the free-speech charity that started the crowdfunding campaign, said in a statement: “The trial involving ‘Lady Chatterley’s Lover’ was a seminal moment in the continuing struggle for freedom of expression, and the judge’s copy belongs here in the U.K., a singular reminder of the road traveled and remaining.”
The campaign had aimed to match the copy’s auction price of 56,250 pounds, about $69,000, the statement from English Pen said. The appeal eventually raised £20,000 to help the university acquire the book.
A spokeswoman for English PEN said that the money raised by the university and the fund-raising campaign went to the original buyer.
The judge’s copy shows significant wear and tear. The spine is chipped, some leaves are coming loose, there is a rust mark left by a paper clip on the cover, and pages are marked with notes and underlinings by the judge, Laurence Byrne, and his wife, Dorothy Byrne. 
The government announced in May that it would prevent the copy from leaving Britain in the hope that a British buyer would match the auction price.
Hayden Phillips, the chairman of the independent Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art, said in a statement at the time that “the prosecution of Penguin Books for publishing ‘Lady Chatterley’s Lover’ was one of the most important criminal trials of the 20th century.”
“Judge Byrne’s copy of the novel, annotated by him and his wife, may be the last surviving contemporary ‘witness’ who took part in the proceedings,” Mr. Phillips added. 
Exporting artworks and some other cultural items that are more than 50 years old requires a special license in Britain, and the review committee concluded that “the departure of the book from the U.K. would be a misfortune because of its close connection to our history and national life.”
Lawrence, one of Britain’s most celebrated modernist writers, did not live long enough to see “Lady Chatterley’s Lover” prevail in the British courts. The book had been published in Italy in 1928 but was long banned in its unexpurgated form in Britain and in the United States. Lawrence died in 1930.
After a change in British obscenity law in 1959, Penguin Books decided to publish a paperback edition, knowing that it was likely to become a test case. The trial in London in 1960 lasted for six days, and “raised such a furor of clashing opinion as has been experienced only once or twice since the war,” the writer Jan Morris noted in The New York Times after its conclusion.
The lead prosecutor, Mervyn Griffith-Jones, was mocked for the social assumptions revealed by his opening statement in which he asked: Would you “approve of your young sons, young daughters — because girls can read as well as boys — reading this book?”
“Is it a book that you would even wish your wife or your servants to read?” he added.
The defense brought in 35 supporters of the novel, including the writer E.M. Forster and the Bishop of Woolwich, who reportedly said that Lawrence had portrayed sexual intercourse as “an act of Holy Communion.”
The jury, three women and nine men, took three hours to deliver a verdict of not guilty in favor of the publisher. 
Ulrika Maude, a professor of modern literature at Bristol University, where the trial papers of Michael Rubinstein, the lawyer for Penguin Books during the case, are also housed, said in a statement: “The trial attests to the ongoing importance of literature in addressing matters that are often seen as inadmissible or taboo in mainstream culture.” 
The trial quickly became a commercial triumph for Penguin — its first 200,000 copies sold out within a day, while two million copies were sold within the next two years. 
The verdict also encouraged those who yearned for social change in Britain.
“Sexual intercourse began,” the poet Philip Larkin wrote in his “Annus Mirabilis,” “Between the end of the Chatterley ban / And the Beatles’ first L.P.”

