   David Wright believes he took a “baby step in the right direction” toward a potential long-awaited return to the majors. 
   The Mets captain felt “butterflies” as he participated in his first rehab game Sunday afternoon, going 0-for-3 and playing third base for five innings with Class A St. Lucie. The 35-year-old struck out looking, struck out swinging and had a line-drive out to left. He also caught one pop up against Clearwater. 
   “Hopefully the results will come, but for now getting three at-bats, going out and playing the field for five innings, seeing some pitches, seeing some really dominant pitching,” Wright told reporters after the game. “I mean, it’s not ideal to go out there and see 96-97 (mph) your first game in a year, (but) it was good to be challenged like that early and I’m all smiles.” 
   Wright said he will report in and then the team will start to make a plan for next week, when he hopes to play in a few home games with St. Lucie. He added that he’ll need to schedule some “off days” periodically as he continues to rehab. 
   "He came out of it feeling really good, so we're going to evaluate him when he comes in tomorrow and see what the next step is," Mets manager Mickey Callaway said. 
   Wright has only appeared in 75 games since 2015, battling multiple injuries and undergoing surgeries to repair his shoulder, back and neck. In March, the seven-time All-Star was told he would have to shut down baseball activity for two months. 
   Wright hasn't played in a major-league game since May of 2016 and had last appeared in a minor-league game on Aug. 26, 2017, but he believes he can return to the majors. 
   “I wouldn’t be out here in 95-degree sunny Florida, dripping sweat if I didn’t think that I could make it back,” said Wright, who entered the season with three years and $47 million left on the eight-year, $138 million contract extension. “And not only just make it back, but I’ve got to see results down here. In order to go up there and try to help those guys, I’m going to have to show that I can be productive and go out there and be counted on to make some hits and make the plays.”   
