In New Zealand, Avocado Shortage Leads to Orchard Crime Wave
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — People in New Zealand are taking desperate measures to acquire a coveted treat for their breakfast toast: avocados.
With prices for the fruit soaring after two years of low harvests, orchards are experiencing a raft of thefts, and black markets have sprung up to distribute the spoils.
To counter the crime wave, some frustrated growers have taken matters into their own hands. An avocado tree in New Zealand’s largest city, Auckland, was surrounded with razor wire, drawing concerns from neighbors who feared children or cats could be hurt.
“Is a child’s health really worth a few avocados?” one resident asked, according to local media reports.
Some of the heists are clearly not the carefully planned work of criminal masterminds. Two robbers were caught fleeing an orchard carrying duvet covers, each loaded with $4,300 worth of avocados. The pair apparently struggled to explain what they were doing with so much fruit.
“It’s not like cannabis, where people can say it was for their own personal use,” said Alasdair Macmillan, New Zealand’s coordinator of community policing.
“It’s clearly not for their own consumption,” he said. “You can only put so much avocado on your burger or in your sushi.”
Jen Scoular, chief executive of New Zealand Avocado, said the thefts were mostly “opportunistic,” with people unable to resist profiting from the shortage.
Some thefts did show evidence of extensive planning. One recent case involved thieves who parked a station wagon inside an orchard, in a corner of the property that was not regularly visited, before robbers with backpacks plundered the fruit.
With the fruit in short supply, official figures showed that local avocado prices smashed records in May. The average cost was five New Zealand dollars, or $3.30, per avocado, a 37 percent increase over last year.
The country cannot look overseas: Because of its strict biosecurity laws, New Zealand does not import avocados. But enterprising, law-abiding New Zealanders are looking to solve the shortfall themselves, and there are now waiting lists for avocado trees at garden centers.
Those who invest in a tree might also want to consider how best to guard it.
Bret Glazer, who lives in the Auckland suburb of Sandringham, recently spent more than $500 on a security system for his avocado tree after multiple thefts. The 30-foot tree produces 500 avocados a season, most of which Mr. Glazer gives away to neighbors, colleagues and friends. Last year, his tree was “professionally harvested” of several hundred fruit in one night, he said.
In April, Mr. Glazer’s partner caught two thieves red-handed — “older men,” he said — as they tried to strip the tree, wielding a long stick with a hook on the end for reaching the upper branches. When confronted, he said, they fled, one of them on a mobility scooter.
Last month, a grower in the upper New Zealand region of Northland said 70 percent of his avocados had been stolen, a loss worth $66,000. The grower, Graham Burgess, told The New Zealand Herald that the theft was “pointless” because the fruit was months from being ready to harvest and would go to waste.
Mr. Macmillan, the police officer, said he knew of “half a dozen” cases that resulted in charges. But he said gathering evidence could prove difficult, since some crops were only checked every few weeks and growers might not know when a theft had occurred.
“So already the investigation cycle has been slow to begin, and the baddies get three or four weeks’ head start,” he said. “The evidence would be well and truly devoured by then.”
Ms. Scoular, from the avocado growers’ organization, said most of the illicit fruit probably ended up in small fruit stores or sushi shops.
Andrew Grilli, store manager at The Plant Depot in the North Island city of Hamilton, said demand for avocado trees had increased “hugely” in recent years as the fruit became more popular in everyday cooking. Avocado toast has become a hit among young, health-conscious adults, in New Zealand as in other countries.
With trees only arriving in two or three shipments a year, Mr. Grilli said, up to half are typically sold in pre-orders before stock is delivered, with the rest snapped up soon after. The store did not currently have any avocado trees in stock and was awaiting another shipment, he said.
Those eager to secure their own avocado toast supply will need patience, Mr. Grilli said. “All going well, from planting the tree, in four or five years you’re going to be getting into some pretty good fruit.”
