Dagger, but No Cloak  Brazil’s Top Spy Exposes C.I.A. Officer
RIO DE JANEIRO — Intelligence officers who think they might like to be posted in Brazil take note: A simple meeting with the country’s spying hierarchy can get your cover blown.
Brazil’s political establishment was captivated on Monday by the apparently casual revelation of the identity of a Central Intelligence Agency official in the capital, Brasília, by the office of Gen. Sérgio Westphalen Etchegoyen, the country’s top intelligence official.
General Etchegoyen’s staff mentioned the official by name and described the official’s position as the C.I.A.’s “chief” in Brasília in a publicly available agenda of the spymaster’s meetings on June 9.
The naming of a C.I.A. official in that manner is thought to be highly unusual, given the secrecy with which spies are supposed to operate. But General Etchegoyen’s office said in a statement that cabinet-level officials are required to disclose their schedules under Brazil’s freedom of information law, enacted in 2011. The names and jobs of those they meet with are registered to observe the “publicity principle” enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution, the statement said.
In the same statement, the general’s staff described the meeting as a “courtesy visit” because the C.I.A. official was wrapping up a posting in Brazil.
In Washington, a C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment on the matter.
“We’ve seen the reports,” said a spokeswoman for the United States Embassy in Brasília, explaining that the embassy could not confirm or deny them.
United States law makes it a federal crime to reveal the identity of covert intelligence officers, and the Obama administration pressed a crackdown on such leaks. Still, the episode in Brasília offered a reminder that intelligence agencies in other countries can hew to different rules.
The Brazilian Intelligence Agency, or A.B.I.N., has come under scrutiny for disclosing the identities of people vying to become agents, while Brazilian spymasters have complained about the ease with which intelligence operatives are called to appear before congressional hearings, which are televised.
“Brazil is not cut out for great power machinations,” said João Augusto de Castro Neves, a political analyst who came across the information regarding General Etchegoyen’s schedule in a newsletter and sent out a message on Twitter about his find.
“I decided to actually read the whole thing and noticed it,” said Mr. Castro Neves, Latin America director at the Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy.
The disclosure offered a distraction from other troubles faced by the government of President Michel Temer, who has sought to restructure Brazil’s intelligence establishment since rising to power last year after the ouster of his predecessor, Dilma Rousseff. Mr. Temer, a deeply unpopular leader, is resisting calls to resign after he was secretly recorded seeming to endorse the obstruction of anticorruption investigations.
Curiously, this may not even be the first time that a C.I.A. official’s identity has been revealed in Brazil in such a nonchalant way. The staff of the director of the Federal Police, an investigative force similar to the F.B.I., made public the names of people it said were two C.I.A. officials, including the same person at the center of this month’s disclosure, in a routine online schedule published on July 11, 2016.
