An Assassin’s Tool Kit  When Guns Are Not Enough
In the ruthless worlds of espionage, global politics and the criminal underground, there are many grim ways to die:
Tea laced with polonium. A face full of the nerve agent VX. A gentleman’s umbrella that shoots ricin pellets.
Sometimes the assassination attempts leave a mystery in their wake, as in the case of the Russian double agent Sergei V. Skripal and his daughter, Yulia Skripal, who were poisoned by a military-grade nerve agent called  Novichok in Salisbury, England, this month.
The episode set off an escalating diplomatic row between Britain and Russia, and is one in a long line of dastardly plots that have captured the public’s imagination. Here is a selection, and the deadly implements deployed.
Leon Trotsky, a Russian revolutionary who created the Soviet Red Army, saw himself as Lenin’s heir, but when Lenin died, he was outflanked by Stalin in the power struggle that followed.
Trotsky fled into exile and ended up in a leafy suburb of Mexico City in 1940. There, an agent of Stalin’s, Ramón Mercader, got into Trotsky’s study with a mountaineering pick hidden under his clothes. When Trotsky turned his back, he buried it in Trotsky’s cranium. The Russian died the next day, Aug. 21.
In 2005, the lost ax — believed to have been stolen by the Mexican police — turned up in the possession of the daughter of a Mexican police commander. According to The Guardian, the woman, Ana Alicia Salas, said her father had filched the bloodstained weapon to preserve it for posterity. But now, she said: “I am looking for some financial benefit. I think something as historically important at this should be worth something, no?”
Francisco Rafael Arellano Félix, a Mexican drug kingpin and former leader of the Tijuana Cartel, was celebrating at a birthday party when he was felled by armed men dressed as clowns.
The drug lord had hobnobbed with celebrities and sports stars, and his family, known as the Arellano Félix clan, was said to have inspired the film “Traffic.”
At the birthday party at a rented beach house in Los Cabos, Mexico, in 2013, assassins with red noses and bright orange wigs mingled among 100 guests. Footage of the scene captures Mr. Arellano Félix’s last moments. As two bands played and a man sang, the clowns began shooting.
“He was hit by two bullets, one in the chest and one in the head,” Isai Arias, a Baja California state government official, said at the time. Mr. Arellano Félix died at 63. The clowns escaped.
Patrice Lumumba, the first legally elected prime minister of the Democratic Republic of Congo, was a champion of African unity and of self-determination for his own country, which had been colonized by Belgium.
But Western governments, which had big stakes in his nation, wanted his head. (The United States, which was believed to have used uranium from Congolese mines for the Hiroshima atomic bomb, feared the charismatic Congolese politician would become an African Fidel Castro.)
The C.I.A. considered poisoning his toothpaste. “I was totally taken aback,” Larry Devlin, a former C.I.A. officer, recalled in The New York Times in 2008 about being handed the toxic toothpaste in 1960 to carry out the assassination. He stalled, believing that the killing would have had “disastrous” global effects, he said.
Mr. Lumumba was deposed in 1960. He fled but was captured, tortured and killed by Congolese fighters on Jan. 17, 1961. His murder is considered one of the most important assassinations of the 20th century; it took place seven months after Congo won independence.
Most do not see the attacks coming.
Kim Jong-nam, the estranged half brother of North Korea’s leader, perished after getting the nerve agent VX in his face at a Malaysian airport in February 2017, when he was set upon by two women who later said they had been recruited for what they were told was a prank.
The Hamas leader Khaled Meshal was targeted in September 1997 by Mossad agents who sprayed poison on his skin. The plot failed after Israel handed over the antidote.
Two men waited until he was about to enter his office in Amman before one walked up and tried to spray a lethal nerve toxin on his neck, but missed and got him in his ear. He later said that a shivering sensation raced down his spine “like an electric shock.”
At the hospital, the Hamas leader was given two days to live. A furious King Hussein of Jordan demanded that Israel provide the antidote, saying the Mossad agents could otherwise face execution. In an extraordinary move, Israel had an agent hand it over, saving Mr. Meshal’s life.
• Gen. Ahmed Shah Massoud, an Afghan warlord, was assassinated in 2001 by two men posing as journalists. They entered his headquarters in the Panjshir Valley in northern Afghanistan, where General Massoud sat on a couch. The “reporter” detonated a bomb strapped to his waist. The “cameraman” set off a bomb hidden in the camera and ran from the room, jumping into the River Oxus, but the general ’s bodyguards pulled him out and killed him.
• Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was sleeping in a room at the Grand Hotel in Brighton, England, on Oct. 12, 1984, when an Irish Republican Army terrorist cell set off a 30-pound bomb that ripped through the building. The blast killed five people and seriously wounded 30 others, but not Ms. Thatcher.
• Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan, the first woman to lead a Muslim country, was killed on Dec. 27, 2007, by a teenage suicide bomber. She had attended an election rally in Rawalpindi when the 15-year-old approached her convo
