Moroccan Man Admits Deadly Stabbing Attack in Finland
TURKU, Finland — A young Moroccan man has admitted to his role in a deadly stabbing rampage last week, which the authorities have called Finland’s first terrorist attack in decades, officials announced on Tuesday.
Police said that the man — who has been tentatively identified as Abderrahman Mechkah, 18, and who appeared in court here on Tuesday via a video feed from his hospital bed — had admitted to the stabbings.
But Chief Inspector Olli Toyras, a police detective, told journalists that much was unclear: whether Mr. Mechkah acted alone, whether his actions were guided or influenced by someone else and even his true name and age.
Finnish officials said Mr. Mechkah was believed to have arrived in Finland in the spring of 2016, after living several months in Germany. He is believed to have used several aliases. He was denied asylum at the beginning of this year.
Police and witnesses say that Mr. Mechkah used two knives to attack women in the center of Turku, a city of 180,000 in southwestern Finland, on Friday afternoon.
Two women, one in her mid-50s and the other in her early 30s, were killed; six other women were injured, along with two men who had tried to protect them. Mr. Mechkah was shot in the thigh.
Police and intelligence agencies had gotten a tip about Mr. Mechkah earlier this year, warning that he might harbor extremist views, but the tip was not given priority because it was too vague to act on. He was not one of some 350 people whom Finnish authorities have been monitoring as potential security threats.
The young man’s defense lawyer, Kaarle Gummerus, said on Tuesday that his client had admitted to the rampage, but that investigators had not yet presented enough evidence to classify the case as a terrorist crime.
The case has raised urgent legal and political questions for Finland, a Nordic nation of 5.5 million that is known as one of the world’s safest countries.
“The people’s security and feeling of safety has been shaken,” Finland’s president, Sauli Vainamo Niinisto, said on Monday. He acknowledged disagreements about immigration, but urged Finns not to turn their backs on migrants. “Finland is bound by international agreements on refugees and asylum seekers,” he said.
The justice minister, Antti Hakkanen, urged lawmakers to fast-track legislation that would strengthen the government’s intelligence-gathering powers. The finance minister, Petteri Orpo, suggested that the legal threshold for taking people suspected of extremist activity into custody should be lowered. And the interior minister, Paula Risikko, said the government would draft a law making it a crime to assist unauthorized migrants. They also talked of setting up detention centers for rejected asylum-seekers pending deportation.
Jussi Halla-aho, the leader of the populist right-wing Finns Party, was quick to criticize the government.
“The event in Turku is the result of badly managed immigration in general, and lack of proper deportation legislation in particular,” he said in a phone interview. “All rejected asylum seekers should be deported immediately.”
As politicians spoke in Helsinki, the capital, the nation’s attention was turned to Turku, about 100 miles to the west.
Mr. Mechkah appeared in Southwest Finland District Court from his hospital bed; a white sheet covered his face and much of his body. He faces two charges of murder with terrorist intent, and eight charges of attempted murder with terrorist intent.
It was not clear what Mr. Mechkah told the court, because journalists were not allowed to listen to testimony from the video feed; they were allowed to listen only to pronouncements by the judge and lawyers, and were repeatedly ushered in and out of the courtroom.
Afterward, journalists shouted questions at Inspector Toyras, asking if Mr. Mechkah had expressed remorse, whether the attack was premeditated and whether he had visited the local mosque to pray shortly before the attack, as the Finnish press has reported.
Inspector Toyras said that investigators had interrogated Mr. Mechkah once, and planned to interview him again on Wednesday. He said that it was a priority to determine whether the young man, who refused at first to answer questions after the attack, had accomplices.
“Of course, we are very interested in whether this was just an individual act, or if there is someone behind it, like a group,” Inspector Toyras told reporters.
Three other men have been arrested and appeared in court as part of the investigation. They were identified as Mohamed Bakier, 18; Ilyas Berrouh, 18; and Abdederrazak Essarioul, 28. A fifth man — identified as Mouad El Fatoyhy, 24 — was released on Tuesday.
All the suspects are Moroccan, and at least two of them had sought asylum in Finland, in addition to Mr. Mechkah. Last year, 155 Moroccans applied for asylum in Finland, but only 20 applications were granted.
The German news agency DPA reported that Mr. Mechkah used several false identities while in Germany, in late 2015 and early 2016, and once was charged with causing bodily harm. DPA said that Mr. Mechkah left the country without informing the authorities.
At least two of the other suspects had spent time in Germany, DPA reported.
Reuters reported that Mr. Berrouh was refused a residence permit in Sweden twice in 2013, and that his third application, which he made using an alias, was also turned down.
The authorities said they were also searching for at least one possible suspect who is no longer in Finland. An international arrest warrant has been issued for that man, and Europol and Interpol were helping with the case, Inspector Toyras said.
