Tiger Woods has no shot at the PGA Championship, it’s all Brooks Koepka’s
   Tiger Woods will not be winning his 16th major this week. 
   His deflating first-round 72 at the PGA Championship Thursday isn’t his only dilemma. Even if he somehow shakes off the rust and finds his game, he will have the same problem he had at last year’s PGA Championship: Brooks Koepka. 
   By the time their feature pairing was over at Bethpage Black, Woods found himself nine shots behind the defending PGA and U.S. Open champ. He’s not catching Koepka. Probably no one is. And if Koepka’s putter stays this hot, he’s running away with this. The big guy brought the Black Course to its knees Thursday with a bogey-free, course record 63, as nonchalantly as if he were playing the Yellow Course. might as well have been playing the Yellow Course. Whoever is underestimating this guy (is Brandel Chamblee in the house?) hasn’t been paying attention. 
   “I mean, I felt like I won this last year. I’m playing good,” Koepka said when asked about making a statement after all the Tiger talk coming into the week. “It was great that Tiger won Augusta, but I mean, we’re at a new week now. I've just got to go out there and focus on me. I’m not really concerned about what's going on. You know what you're going to get when you play with him. Obviously everybody in New York is going to be cheering for him, and it’s going to be loud, especially if he makes a putt. You’ve just got to keep battling and find a way to get through it.” 
   Woods looked like a guy who hasn’t played a tournament in five weeks – and only nine practice holes this week. He made two double bogeys, including a fat one on his first hole and kept three-putting these not-that-difficult greens. He made the turn at 3-over and seemingly flipped switch when he got to No. 1, gaining four shots over the next four holes, including a 30-foot eagle putt on four. The Bethpage galleries started buzzing for the first time. 
   That momentum came to a dead halt with three-putt bogeys on five and seven and another six-foot miss on eight after a mediocre chip. 
   The only player who gave Koepka a game was Danny Lee, who played in the afternoon wave and shot an impressive 6-under 64. Lee, 28, was born in Incheon, South Korea, and emigrated to New Zealand when he was eight. He has one PGA Tour victory. 
   Woods was brief in his comments. He said he skipped his practice round Wednesday because he wasn’t feeling well although he said he felt fine Thursday. 
   “It wasn't as clean as I'd like to have it for sure,” he said afterwards “I felt like I was getting back into the round. I fought my way back and I had two double bogeys in through there and was still able to get it to under par for the day. Unfortunately I had a couple three-putts there and hit a bad chip there at eight and left myself in a bad spot. Consequently I’m a long way back.” It all started on Tiger’s first hole, the long par-four 10th. Woods barely ended up in the right rough off the tee but he might as well have been 15 yards in. All he could do was pitch out to about 100 yards. He won’t be alone this week. That’s why there’s a premium on wedge play to get up and down for par. But after seeing Francesco Molinari come up short with his pitch, Woods felt the breeze in his face and planned to use the backboard behind the hole to bring it back to the cup. Instead, he overshot the green and threw back his head in disgust, recognizing it immediately. He ran his chip six feet past and missed it for an opening double bogey. 
   Meanwhile, Koepka calmly (he knows no other way) drained a 35-footer for birdie from the back of the green, making an emphatic opening statement. Woods trailed him by three after one hole. 
   The start was reminiscent of what happened last August at the PGA Championship at Bellerive. Woods bogeyed his opening hole after a poor tee shot and followed up with a double bogey on the next hole when he yanked an iron shot into the rough, misjudged a wedge and ended up in the water. 
   He salvaged a first-round 70 and, with a closing 64, ended up passing everyone else in the field but one. Koepka beat him by two. 
   Koepka already shared the PGA Championship tournament record after a 63 last year. He’s now the only person in PGA history to shoot 63 twice. 
   And it could have been lower. When he came off the course, he said there was room for improvement. 
   “This is a crazy day. Seven-under, I know it’s not going to happen every day, I know that,” he said. “I parred the two par fives and missed a five-footer on 11. It could have been a hell of a round. Don’t get me wrong. It was great. I’ll take it every day. I just need to clean a few things up.” 
   Right now, he’s cleaning up the field.   
