Javier Duarte, Mexican Ex-Governor Accused of Diverting Money, Is Captured
MEXICO CITY — After a six-month manhunt spanning at least three continents, the former governor of Veracruz state in Mexico was captured in Guatemala and will face extradition to Mexico, where he is wanted on suspicion of diverting millions of dollars to phantom companies, Mexican authorities said.
Javier Duarte, who served as governor of Veracruz from 2010 until last October, was found late Saturday night holed up in a hotel with his wife in the resort town of Panajachel, on Lake Atitlán in the highlands of Guatemala, officials said. He has denied the charges against him, which include graft and organized crime.
During his run from the law, Mr. Duarte, once considered a luminary of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, became a quintessential symbol of malfeasance and a huge embarrassment to the party, which has been criticized for its inability to rein in rampant corruption.
But Mr. Duarte’s capture could provide some political capital to President Enrique Peña Nieto, whose approval ratings have plummeted over the past two years and whose party is preparing for a close, fierce fight to hold onto the presidency in elections next year. His party, known by its Spanish initials, P.R.I., is also locked in a tight race for the governorship of the State of Mexico, a historical stronghold for the party, where corruption has become a central campaign theme.
Mr. Duarte was one of a triumvirate of rogue P.R.I. governors sought by the Mexican authorities. Tomás Yarrington, the former governor of Tamaulipas state who has been accused by Mexican and American prosecutors of money laundering and racketeering, among other charges, was captured in Italy last week. Both Mexico and the United States are expected to file extradition requests with the Italian authorities.
Another former governor, César Duarte of Chihuahua state, no relation to Javier Duarte, remains at large. He has been accused of embezzlement and, according to the Mexican authorities, is thought to be hiding in the United States.
P.R.I. had sought to isolate Javier Duarte, expelling him from the party soon after his disappearance. After his capture, the party issued a statement calling for punishment that makes an example of him “as well as anyone who is confirmed to have taken part in his criminal ring,” The Associated Press reported.
Mr. Duarte was transferred to a military prison in Guatemala’s capital on Sunday, and Mexico’s attorney general’s office said prosecutors had directed the Foreign Ministry to request his extradition by the Guatemalan government.
Mr. Duarte left office on Oct. 12, several weeks before the end of his term, saying he was prepared to fight the criminal allegations. Instead, he promptly vanished. Interpol joined the search and the Mexican government offered a reward of about $811,000 for his capture.
The state he left behind is, by some measures, a disaster. During his term, Veracruz, an oil-rich area on the Gulf Coast, suffered spiraling violence and widespread disappearances as criminal organizations fought for turf. Seventeen journalists were murdered during his six years in office, according to figures compiled by a special state committee.
Last month, investigators discovered a mass grave in the state containing hundreds of human skulls; the condition of the remains suggested that the victims might have been killed years ago.
In their investigation of Mr. Duarte, the authorities have seized property and businesses purportedly tied to him, and have frozen scores of bank accounts. Investigators say that while he was governor, he orchestrated a scheme in which tens of millions of dollars earmarked for social programs were diverted to an elaborate network of phantom companies.
Investigators have alleged that some of the money was used to buy, among other luxuries, properties in Mexico, Texas and Florida, according to Animal Político, an investigative digital publication in Mexico.
Anticorruption activists say that some of the worst malfeasance in Mexico has occurred in governors’ offices around the country, in part because of limited checks on governors’ power, allowing state leaders to hand out patronage contracts and secretly amass ill-gotten wealth. The governors have in part been shielded by laws that make it difficult for federal authorities to audit state governments and prosecute wrongdoing by state officials, experts say.
The public’s tolerance of corruption, long part of the fabric of Mexican life, reached a tipping point in recent years, spurring a grass-roots anticorruption movement that helped push the successful passage of new anticorruption legislation.
Public disgust with corruption also contributed to electoral losses for the president’s party in elections for governor last year, including in Veracruz, where the P.R.I. had governed uninterrupted for more than eight decades.
