Kim Jong-un Meets Putin in Russia With U.S. Talks Faltering
MOSCOW — Two months after a failed summit meeting with President Trump, North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, met on Thursday with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, as Mr. Kim tries to rally international support for an approach to sanctions relief and gradual nuclear disarmament that the Trump administration opposes.
North Korea wanted security guarantees from nations other than the United States before it abandons its nuclear arsenal, along with assurances that “its sovereignty will be preserved,” Mr. Putin said after the meeting.
Mr. Kim’s visit to the Pacific port city of Vladivostok, Russia, was his first trip abroad since February, when he and Mr. Trump met with much fanfare in Vietnam, only to see negotiations end abruptly, amid mutual recriminations, without any progress toward an agreement.
“The whole world’s attention is focused on the issue on the Korean Peninsula,” Mr. Kim told Mr. Putin as he called for “meaningful dialogue today” on the issue. Afterward, Mr. Putin said the United States and Russia had a common interest in preventing nuclear proliferation, in North Korea and elsewhere.
But he also took an apparent swipe at American foreign policy, suggesting that any military action taken by the United States against other nations complicated efforts to persuade North Korea to accept a security guarantee in exchange for nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Putin said the two leaders had agreed that the world needed “international law, not law of the fist,” although he added that Mr. Kim had asked him to share the details of the talks with the United States and China. There were “no secrets” at the negotiations, he added.
“It is my and my government’s firm strategic position that the strategic and traditional friendly relations between North Korea and Russia be strengthened and improved ceaselessly to fit the needs of the new century,” Mr. Kim said after the meeting.
Mr. Putin was expected to fly to Beijing for a conference on China’s Belt and Road investment program after his talks with Mr. Kim, Russian news outlets reported.
At the February talks in Vietnam, in Hanoi, the capital, Mr. Trump had proposed a “big deal” to lift punishing economic sanctions in return for a quick and complete elimination of North Korea’s nuclear weapons program. Mr. Kim offered, instead, only a partial dismantling of nuclear facilities — while keeping his arsenal of nuclear warheads and missiles — in exchange for relief from the most harmful sanctions.
Each side called the other’s plan unacceptable and the talks collapsed — a sharp contrast to the rosy picture both leaders painted of their first meeting, last June, in Singapore.
North Korea has since vented its frustration with Washington, conducting a weapons test and accusing Mr. Trump’s national security adviser, John R. Bolton, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo of sabotaging the nuclear negotiations. Mr. Kim said he was willing to meet Mr. Trump again, but only if the president made a new proposal the North could accept by the end of the year.
Looking for friendlier counterweights to the 
