Victims of the Sri Lanka Terrorist Attacks
Families celebrating a holiday and newlyweds toasting their new lives. Professionals and laborers, students and grandparents, Sri Lankans and foreigners. The coordinated attacks on Sri Lankan hotels and churches on Easter Sunday brought to a sudden, brutal end the lives of more than 250 people. 
Among the dead were a family of five who were attending Mass as they did most Sundays. On Tuesday, their family held a joint funeral, the coffins of a mother, father, their two young daughters and infant son lined up in a row. 
These are the victims of the Sri Lanka attacks. 
Danadari Kuruppuachchi, 36, of Sri Lanka, was a manager at a clothing manufacturer, and regularly posted photos of her smiling family on social media. She and her husband, Clode Eshan Rangana Fernando, 41, had been married for nine years and were at St. Sebastian’s Church in Negombo with their three children at the time of the attack, a family member said. 
Fabiola Fernando, 6, was an elementary school student. In a photo posted to her mother’s Facebook page, she showed off a gold medal, a small smile on her face. Leona Fernando, 4, the middle child in her family, was learning to read and was holding a copy of “Sleeping Beauty” in the picture. Seth Fernando, 11 months, was the newest addition to the Fernando family. He was buried alongside his parents and two sisters.
Shantha Mayadunne of Sri Lanka, a celebrity chef, was sharing breakfast with her family at the Shangri-La Hotel at the time of the attack. Her daughter Nisanga Mayadunne, who had studied at the University of London, lived in Colombo, the capital. 
Ravindran Fernando, 61, of Sri Lanka, a restaurant employee who worked near St. Anthony’s Shrine in Colombo, was attending Easter Mass.
Mary Otricia Johnson, 47, of Sri Lanka, a mother of three from Colombo, was killed at St. Anthony’s Shrine. 
Five of the victims were Sri Lankan employees at the Cinnamon Grand hotel, a spokeswoman said on Tuesday: M.H.M. Ibrahim, 23, M.N.M. Nisthar, 21, B.A.D.N. Shantha, 50, T.A.A. Yaheya, 36, and G.M.D. Sanjeewani, 35.
K. Pirathap, 38, of Sri Lanka drove a rickshaw in Colombo. He, his wife, Anashdi, 35, and their two daughters, Antinaa, 7, and Abriyaana, 1, were all killed at St. Anthony’s Shrine. The family was in a celebratory mood at Mass on Sunday: Mr. Pirathap had just purchased a new vehicle.
Ramesh Raju, 40, of Sri Lanka was a father, husband and building contractor. His family told the BBC that he had died while trying to protect others at Zion Church in Batticaloa.
Sharon Stepan Santhakumar, 11, and his sister Sarah Epzhibah Santhakumar, 10, were killed at the Zion Church in Batticaloa, the BBC reported, and were buried together a day after the attacks.
Berlington Joseph Gomez, 33, and Chandrika Arumugam, 31, both of Sri Lanka, were killed by the blast at St. Anthony’s Shrine along with their three sons: Bevon, 9; Clavon, 6; and Avon, 11 months.
Gayani Fernando, of Sri Lanka, was killed along with her husband, Tyronne Gulding, 56, and her mother, Mary Anaslyn Silva.
Dileep Roshan, 37, was a Sri Lankan carpenter who left behind a wife and daughter.
Sneha Savindi, 12, of Sri Lanka, was killed in the bombing at St. Sebastian’s Church, as were Calistas Fernando and two of his family members.
Zayan Chowdhury, an 8-year-old relative of a prominent Bangladeshi politician, had been on vacation with his family.
Dhulodh Anthony, 7, was buried at a Methodist cemetery in Negombo.
Enosh Silva, 12, of Sri Lanka, was one of several children killed at St. Sebastian’s church, his father told Agence France-Presse.
Jiyasha Sheshani Janz, 12, and her mother, Dineesha Geethani de Vaas, were killed in the blast at St. Sebastian’s Church.
Diluk Fernando, 38, of Sri Lanka, was a carpenter and the father of a little girl.
Five members of India’s Janata Dal Secular political party were killed: Gowda Ramesh, K.M. Lakshminarayan, M. Rangappa, K.G. Hanumantharayappa and Sri Hanumaiah Shivakumar.
Razeena Khader Kukkady, 68, an Indian, lived in Dubai but had traveled to Colombo to meet her relatives, the BBC reported.
A. Maregowda, H. Puttaraju, Vemurai Tulsiram and S.R. Nagaraj were also killed, according to India’s High Commissioner. 
Serhan Selcuk Narici, 34, of Turkey, was an engineer working on a project in Colombo.
Yigit Ali Cavus, 25, of Turkey, was also working in the country as an engineer. His body was buried in his home city, Adiyaman, on Tuesday.
Anita Nicholson, 42, of Britain, a lawyer, was visiting Sri Lanka with her husband and children from their home in Singapore. She and her children, Alex Nicholson, 14, and Annabel Nicholson, 11, were killed while sharing a meal. Their father, Ben, said the children “shared with their mother the priceless ability to light up any room they entered.”
Sally Bradley Harrop, 56, and Billy Harrop, 56, both Britons, were on vacation in Sri Lanka. Mrs. Harrop, a doctor, and Mr. Harrop, a former firefighter from the Manchester area in England, moved to Perth, Australia, in 2012. 
Daniel Linsey, 19, of Britain, was studying at Westminster Kingsway College in London and was vacationing with his family.
Amelie Linsey, 15, of Britain, attended Godolphin and Latymer School in London and was with her family at the Shangri-La Hotel. 
Lorraine Campbell, 55, of Britain, was an information technology director who lived in Dubai and was on a work trip to Sri Lanka. She was last seen on CCTV footage having breakfast with a colleague.
Dieter Kowalski, 40, an American, was a Denver resident. He was on a business trip to Sri Lanka for Pearson, an educational media company.
Kieran Shafritz de Zoysa, 11, an American, was a fifth grader at Sidwell Friends School in Washington. “He was going to do great things,” his father said in an interview with Reuters.
Manik Suriaaratchi of Australia planned to move back to Melbourne with her family next year, her husband told the Australian broadcaster ABC. She and her daughter were killed in the attack. 
Alexendria Suriaaratchi, 10, of Australia, was attending a church service with her mother at the time of the attack. 
Rui Lucas, 31, of Portugal, was staying at the Kingsbury hotel in Colombo on his honeymoon after getting married last week, according to Jornal de Notícias, a newspaper in Portugal. His wife survived.
Monique Allen, 54, of the Netherlands, was eating breakfast with her son Jason when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives, the BBC reported. Jason survived, as did Ms. Allen’s husband and her two other sons, who were upstairs in their room at the time.
Kaori Takahashi, 39, of Japan, led a women’s chapter of a volunteer support group for Japanese expatriates and their families in Sri Lanka. She was eating breakfast at the Shangri-La Hotel with her family, according to NHK, Japan’s national broadcaster.
Maria Gonzalez Vicente, 32, of Spain, was originally from a small town in Galicia and was on vacation in Sri Lanka with her boyfriend, according to the Spanish news outlet El País. 
Alberto Chaves Gómez, 31, of Spain, was also from Galicia but had been working in India and was on vacation in Sri Lanka with his girlfriend. 
Ahmed Zain Jaafari and Hani Maged Othman were cabin crew employees on Saudi Arabian Airlines. The airline confirmed their deaths in a statement.
Three of the four children of Anders Holch Povlsen, a Danish billionaire, were among the victims, though their names have not yet been released.
This article will continue to update as more information becomes available. 
Reporting was contributed by Kai Schultz and Aanya Wipulasena from Colombo, Sri Lanka; Daniel Victor and Mike Ives from Hong Kong; Hisako Ueno from Tokyo; Martin Selsoe from Odense, Denmark; Isabella Kwai from Sydney; Megan Specia, Sandra E. Garcia, Jacey Fortin and Niraj Chokshi from New York; and Campbell Robertson from Pittsburgh.
