Australia Battles Amazon, With Populist Defiance
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
Just before I finished my story about Amazon’s arrival in Australia and its possible impact on the book industry, I started to hear something familiar in the way bookstore owners and authors were talking about their resistance to the giant American retailer.
Then it hit me.
Isn’t their intense opposition to Amazon’s arrival just another version of the nationalist populism of Pauline Hanson and Donald J. Trump?
What if the culture industry is for the intellectual left what factory jobs are for the populist right — a piece of the economy tied to identity and nostalgia that they just can’t help but want preserved and protected at all costs?
There are obviously differences between resistance to a large corporate behemoth like Amazon, and resistance to, say immigrants and refugees — big differences. But at some core human level, both are driven by fear of a future defined by outsiders, and a love for what is.
I recognized the emotions I heard talking to bookstore owners and writers because it reminded me of the emotions I heard talking to working-class Americans as they struggled through the global financial crisis and its aftermath. In both cases, many of the people I talked to started with jabs of outrage only to end with sighs and worry.
“I wish I was more optimistic,” said Suzy Wilson, the owner of Riverbend Books in Brisbane.
“What concerns me the most about the growing influence of corporations like Amazon is their worldview,” said Tim Winton, the author of “Cloudstreet” and many other well-known novels. “People who work in the book industry are agents of culture rather than just instruments of commerce.”
That pessimism and the demand for a society built to a more human scale and tied more closely to identity and agency crosses ideological and international borders.
It’s Catalonia trying to split from Spain. It’s Silicon Valley insiders calling for us all to turn off our smartphones.
It’s Steve Bannon and Brexit, yes, but it may also be Emmanuel Macron and Jacinda Ardern.
Whether populism is the right word for this is an open question, but whatever it is, it may be the “ism” of our time — a messy mishmash of human urges seeking a middle ground after the Cold War battle between capitalism and communism.
Maybe it’s just a function of change, and a lot of it.
A McKinsey Institute report from 2015 keeps coming back to me. It compared the current moment of globalization and technological change with the Industrial Revolution, and concluded that in this era, “change is happening 10 times faster and at 300 times the scale, or roughly 3,000 times the impact.”
If that assessment is accurate, the urge to pull inward and protect your own — regardless of your professed politics — starts to make more sense.
Add to that the continued rise in influence of digital giants like Facebook, Google and Amazon (part of what our tech columnist has identified as “the Frightful Five”) and it’s hard to see a world in which the tensions between the local and the global diminish anytime soon.
Some countries (Canada, for one) have mostly avoided the populist tilt that’s careening through the developed world. The United States and England, meanwhile, are grappling with it every day.
Where do you think Australia will end up falling on the spectrum between nationalism and globalism?
And on a more personal note, where do you draw the line between openness to the world, and protection for the local?
I’m convinced there’s a lot to talk about with this subject, so tell me your thoughts at nytaustralia@nytimes.com. If you’re a subscriber, join us in our Facebook group for more discussion.
As always, we also hope you’ll share this newsletter if you have friends who might also be interested and encourage them to sign up for my weekly missives.
And now here are my picks of the week, a preview of our public event in Sydney this week with Joe Kahn, The New York Times’s managing editor, and a recommendation for another newsletter we enjoy.
____
In addition to my Amazon story, our coverage since last week’s newsletter included a look at the dangers facing refugees on Manus Island, and our Beijing bureau chief, Jane Perlez (a faithful Aussie), wrote about the ways that various countries, including Australia, are being vexed by China’s rise.
We also explored the triumph of Jacinda Ardern, the new prime minister of New Zealand, and the challenges she now faces with governing.
On the lighter side, yes, we covered those Queenslanders in the crocodile trap. And for a regular feature about reporters and technology, here’s what I’ve loved and loathed about getting our Sydney bureau up and running. (The gist: NBN bad, Gumtree good.)
One more thing: be sure to check nytimes.com/au tomorrow for the first review from our new Australia restaurant critic. We’re very excited to bring Times-ian food criticism to cities and towns all over the country — another new addition as we build out our team.
______
This stunning and heart-wrenching feature on teenage girls who were forced to become suicide bombers by Boko Haram in Nigeria will stay with you — because of both the words and photographs.
The artful, intimate yet privacy-protecting images (including the one above) were shot by Adam Ferguson, the Aussie photographer responsible for our earlier interactive visual essay on the outback.
And I’m happy to report that he’ll be back soon for more arresting work from Australia, so stay tuned.
______
• The New York Times editorial board weighs in on the Adani coal mine, arguing that “it’s the opposite of what Australia, India or the rest of the world needs.”
• Miguel Syjuco writes about the way fake news is damaging the Philippines.
• Thomas Friedman tries to goad General Mattis into standing up to President Trump, writing: “You need to lead McMaster, Tillerson and Kelly (Pompeo is a lost cause) in telling Trump that if he does not change his ways you will all quit, en masse.”
______
Joseph Kahn, the managing editor of The Times, is here in Sydney this week, and you’re all invited to try and catch him in person or on the air.
He’ll be on ABC radio this afternoon, Thursday, around 4 p.m.
On Friday, he’ll present the Andrew Olle Media Lecture.
On Monday at 3 p.m., he’ll be discussing the challenges of running a newsroom in an era of digital disruption and President Trump at a public event at the University of Sydney with Simon Jackman of United States Studies Center.
In between, he’ll be doing a mix of public and private discussions... and perhaps a bit of surfing.
______
The Briefing, a daily newsletter from The Saturday Paper, regularly includes New York Times links, but that’s not the only reason we like it.
There are also links to stories we might have missed in other outlets from all over the world, and of course, some provocative commentary from The Saturday Paper, including this fascinating read from Richard Cooke, who explores why Milo Yiannopoulos has been focusing on Australia.
He suggests that part of the reason is the Australian media — “large, right-wing heavy, thin on talent,” he writes — and because Australia still tends to “seek endorsement, or at least attention” from “any outsider who can stomach 22 hours on a plane.”
Agree or disagree, but sign up for the weekly edition, delivered Saturday, and the daily.
