Rwanda Accuses France of Complicity in 1994 Genocide
KIGALI, Rwanda — The Rwandan government released an independent report on Wednesday accusing French officials of complicity in the 1994 genocide, risking further strains to already icy relations between the two countries.
The report, commissioned by the Rwandan government and conducted by a Washington law firm, alleges that French military forces trained their Rwandan counterparts, supplied them with weapons even after an arms embargo, and gave cover, under the auspices of a United Nations-sanctioned humanitarian mission, in the last moments of a genocidal campaign.
Researchers and the Rwandan government say they cannot get France to make good on earlier commitments to fully open its archives or otherwise investigate the country’s role.
[On May 16, 2020, Félicien Kabuga, one of the most-wanted fugitives of the Rwandan genocide was arrested just outside Paris.]
“What happened in the early ’90s and even before, in the lead-up to the genocide, is something France will have to come to terms with,” said Louise Mushikiwabo, the foreign minister of Rwanda. “Rwanda is not going away. We’re not going anywhere.”
Archival documents show that the French government was a close ally of the Rwandan regime that planned and perpetrated the mass slaughter of an estimated 800,000 people, most of them members of the Tutsi ethnic minority. Historians say a son of François Mitterrand, the French president at the time, was also a close friend of the Rwandan leader whose government organized the genocide.
Some examples of French complicity remain raw 23 years later.
“There were cases where they found Tutsi refugees, saw them, and then left them, and more of them were killed,” said Timothy P. Longman, the director of the African Studies Center at Boston University. “It’s one thing after another. The French absolutely deserve to be condemned.”
The two governments have repeatedly tussled over access to information, in procedural disputes that are part of a larger political drama.
In 2006, a French judge opened an investigation into the 1994 plane crash that killed President Juvenal Habyarimana of Rwanda, a member of the majority Hutu ethnic group. The crash is widely seen as the spark that ignited the genocide, making responsibility for the crash one of the most politically volatile questions in Rwanda.
According to diplomatic cables, French officials at the time blamed the Tutsi rebel army led by Paul Kagame, now Rwanda’s president. Mr. Kagame’s government has long maintained that the plane was shot down by Hutu military actors.
The Rwandans responded to the investigation by severing diplomatic ties with France and initiating their own inquiry into the French role in the genocide. The two countries did not restore diplomatic relations until 2009.
The relationship nevertheless remains fraught. In 2015, France blocked the nomination of Rwanda’s ambassador to the European Union; the country is still waiting for approval of its new appointee for the post, according to Rwandan government officials.
France’s reluctance to prosecute individuals involved in the genocide has further aggravated the situation.
Last year, the Rwandan government asked the French for permission to question some of the 22 French military officers who it said bore some responsibility for the kill
