Iraqi Kurds Will Vote on Independence, Recalling Tortured Past
MALA OMER, Iraq — The Kurdish soldier, wounded in battle last year, rose in pain from his wheelchair. As his reedy legs wobbled, his 13-year-old brother thrust a cane into his hand.
The soldier, Dana Salah Hama, was undergoing physical therapy at his home last week to become strong enough to hobble to a polling station on Monday, when Iraqi Kurds plan to vote on independence from Iraq.
For Mr. Hama, and for several million fellow Kurds in the autonomous enclave of Kurdistan, the vote is a down payment on a dream deferred. Denied a homeland after World War I, Iraq’s Kurds are determined to escape their tortured past and fulfill a national destiny: a country to call their own.
“Kurds know no one will protect us but ourselves,” said Mr. Hama, 35, whose back was injured by an roadside bomb as he battled Islamic State militants last year. “That is why I fought — for the day we Kurds will be both free and safe.”
Almost every Kurd in northern Iraq can trace a family history stained by treachery and dispossession: Kurdish women and children killed in chemical attacks, villages razed, Kurdish men detained and murdered, families deported or banished to internment camps.
For decades, Baathist-led governments in Baghdad tried to crush or evict the Kurds, and to repopulate their ancestral lands with Arabs. But protected from Saddam Hussein’s troops by an American no-fly zone since 1991, the Kurds have since built a thriving proto-state across northern Iraq.
Now that Kurdish fighters have proved nearly indispensable to the American-led coalition’s fight against the Islamic State, Kurdish leaders sense that this is their moment. Some of the most urgent issues in the region – terrorism, oil, the brutal civil war in Syria and the upheavals of postwar Iraq – intersect in Kurdistan.
But as tens of thousands of flag-waving Kurds packed a stadium in Erbil, the capital, on Friday, chanting “Bye-bye, Iraq!” the referendum was under threat.
Nearly every major power in the region has opposed the vote, and the Kurds were locked in tense negotiations with the United States and Baghdad, offering to cancel the referendum in return for an ironclad guarantee of a road map to independence within a specified time.
If the vote does go forward, “there is no going back on independence,” said Peter W. Galbraith, a former American diplomat who is close to the Kurdish leadership.
Mr. Galbraith predicted a solid majority in favor of independence. “Would you want to be part of a country that committed genocide against you?” he asked.
On the eve of the vote late Sunday, tensions escalated as Mr. Barzani declared that the Kurds’ “partnership” with Iraq was finished and Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi warned that Iraq would take “necessary measures” to preserve the country’s unity.
Iran, at Iraq’s request, halted flights to and from the two international airports inside the autonomous Kurdistan region. Iranian troops initiated military exercises on Iran’s border with Iraq near the Kurdish region, nearly a week after Turkey began conducting tank drills on its northern border with Iraq.
In Baghdad, the United States Embassy warned American citizens about possible unrest during the referendum, particularly in the disputed areas.
Often called the world’s largest ethnic group without a homeland, some 30 million Kurds are spread across Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria. They were denied statehood when the Middle East map was redrawn after World War I. Isolated and marginalized, Iraq’s Kurds are now demanding a path to self-determination.
Kurdistan is part of Iraq, but it looks and feels like a separate nation. It enjoys broad autonomy, with its own government and parliament, its own language and customs and a fighting force known as the pesh merga.
After the American-led invasion that toppled Mr. Hussein in 2003, Kurdistan endured a mutually dependent but ultimately dysfunctional relationship with Iraq. In 2006, a Kurdistan agency hired an American company to produce an advertising slogan that was both ambivalent and taunting: “Kurdistan — the other Iraq.”
After pesh merga fighters seized the city of Kirkuk and its lucrative oil fields in 2014, Baghdad stopped sending budget payments, crippling a Kurdistan economy already battered by sinking oil prices.
Arabic, once mandatory in Kurdistan schools, is fading among young Kurds, many of whom barely speak the language.
Kazei Kurda, 22, a Kurdish university student, said teachers scolded pupils who said they lived in Iraq. They are told they live in Kurdistan, she said.
Ms. Kurda said the atrocities inflicted upon Kurds were drummed into her as a child. Several members of her mother’s family died in 1988, when Mr. Hussein’s military killed up to 5,000 people in a chemical gas attack on the city of Halabja.
From 1977 to 1987, more than 4,500 Kurdish villages were razed and thousands of residents forcibly removed to detention camps, according to Human Rights Watch. During Mr. Hussein’s Anfal campaign against Kurds in 1988, up to 100,000 Kurds were executed.
“The history of the Kurds is one of betrayal,” said David L. Phillips, a former State Department adviser who worked on Iraq for 30 years.
Amina Ahmed, 53, a former pesh merga fighter, said her brother was executed by the Baathist government. Her family was evicted from the Kurdish region and spent seven years in an internment camp inside Iraq — “a foreign country,” Ms. Ahmed called it.
Those memories will guide her hand, she said, when she votes “yes” in the referendum: “We are writing our own history now.”
Since the rise of the Islamic State in 2014, the pesh merga and the Iraqi Army have been allies in the fight to drive the militants from Iraq. After Iraqi soldiers fled an Islamic State onslaught that year, the pesh merga stood and fought, seizing Iraqi areas and expanding the Kurdish enclave by more than 40 percent.
But the dispute over the independence vote has become so acrimonious and intractable that Kurds say now is the time to break away from Iraq.
“We have given up on Baghdad now that the Iraq we fought for is broken,” said Hoshyar Zebari, Iraq’s former foreign minister and a leader of the referendum effort. Mr. Zebari said the Shiite Muslim-led Baghdad government had aligned with Iran, no friend of Iraq’s Kurds or the United States.
The Kurds’ generations-long sense of mistrust and insecurity is playing out in the political showdown with the United States, which fears the referendum will foment ethnic violence, fracture Iraq and rupture the coalition against the Islamic State.
“The Kurdish psyche is one of being different — and very bitter over how the rest of the world looks at us, especially the Arabs,” said Alan Noory, a Kurdish university professor.
Mahdi Ahmed Hamza, 49, a school headmaster, said he had always felt like a second-class citizen, barely tolerated by Iraqi Arabs outside Kurdistan.
“It’s like you are a bird in a cage that has food brought to it,” Mr. Hamza said. “But only when you are able to fly away do you discover that you are able to feed yourself.”
For Lt. Esra Salim, a pesh merga soldier, the sound of knocking will be playing in her head when she votes “yes” on Monday. She said she would always remember Iraqi security forces constantly knocking on her family’s door, searching for male relatives hiding in attics and garden sheds. Many Kurdish men were killed, imprisoned or pressed into military service.
Lieutenant Salim, 26, said her family was forcibly evicted and replaced by Arabs in the 1980s.
“We can never, ever let that happen again,” she said. “This is why I fight — and why I will vote for independence.”
Najmaldin Karim, 67, said that in 1963, when he was 13, Iraqi government soldiers publicly executed Kurds in his hometown, Kirkuk, and hanged their corpses in the streets. Mr. Karim saw the dangling body of the father of one of his best friends.
“I still see that face — all those faces — right in front of me,” he said.
Today, Mr. Karim is the embattled governor of Kirkuk province, fired on Sept. 14 by Baghdad but still in office because Kirkuk is under Kurdish control.
But Kirkuk, one of several disputed areas included in the referendum, is also home to Arabs and Turkmens, who feel threatened by possible inclusion in a Kurdish nation.
“Maybe the Kurds will tell Turkmens and Arabs to leave because now this is a home for the Kurds,” said Ali Abdel, 37, a Turkmen who owns a billiard hall in Kirkuk.
Mr. Abdel’s Kurdish boyhood friend and business partner, Mohammed Hussein, 37, assured his friend that Kurdistan would continue to welcome everyone.
“The Turkmens will be safe,” Mr. Hussein said. “All we want is a homeland where we can be safe, too, along with our Arab and Turkmen brothers.”
Sixty miles north, Mr. Hama, the wounded Kurdish soldier, practiced shuffling with a walker. He said his family was forcibly removed from their ancestral village in 1988 and confined to an internment camp for five years.
“I’m ashamed to be an Iraqi citizen after what Iraq has done to our people,” he said. “Now I’m voting yes to make my children the first generation who can call themselves Kurdish citizens.”
His father, Salah Mohamad Amin, 64, a former pesh merga fighter, said his sister and her four children were abducted by Iraqi forces in the 1980s and never seen again.
“People around the world may wonder why the Kurds are causing trouble with this vote,” Mr. Amin said. “If they knew our history, they would understand.”
