Denied Power, Armenian Opposition Leader Urges Nationwide Strikes
MOSCOW — The governing party in Armenia thwarted the opposition leader’s effort to become prime minister on Tuesday, setting the stage for continued upheaval as street protesters ratchet up their efforts to force the ruling elite to loosen its grip on the country.
In an extraordinary session of Parliament, the opposition leader, Nikol Pashinyan, urged the Republican Party, which has the most lawmakers, to install him as prime minister, warning that if they did not, they would face a “political tsunami” on the streets.
When all but one member of the party voted against him anyway, Mr. Pashinyan called for a national strike starting Wednesday to paralyze roads, railroads, airports, schools and public services.
“In the Armenian Republic there is no power that can stand against you,” he told a cheering crowd of tens of thousands of supporters gathered on Republic Square in central Yerevan, the capital, where many had spent more than eight hours watching live broadcasts of the speeches in Parliament.
Despite the peaceful nature of the protests thus far, the standoff could further destabilize Armenia, feeding fears that neighboring Azerbaijan might exploit the crisis to rekindle a decades-long war over the ethnically divided enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Russia, which maintains a military base in Armenia, has kept its distance from the crisis, stating repeatedly that it is an internal matter and urging all sides to settle their differences legally.
Still, Armenia, a miniature country of some 2.8 million people in the southern Caucasus, was moving into uncharted territory.
“This is unprecedented,” said Emil Sanamyan, an analyst with the University of Southern California’s Institute of Armenian Studies. The defeat takes Mr. Pashinyan, who had been riding a wave of protest euphoria, “down a notch politically,” Mr. Sanamyan said. “That creates an unstable, uncertain situation.”
The country seemed locked in an extended civics lesson on Tuesday as citizens gathered around car radios or television monitors throughout the day to listen to the parliamentary proceedings.
In Parliament, Mr. Pashinyan and his supporters tried to leverage the street demonstrations of the past two weeks, which had already forced the resignation of Serzh Sargsyan, the man who had led Armenia since 2008, into a vote to make the opposition figure the country’s next leader.
“Hundreds of thousands of citizens of Armenia are standing on streets and squares with one question,” Mr. Pashinyan told the extraordinary Parliament session, which was streamed live by Civilnet.am. “Is the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia a body that will solve the crisis, or is it a body that will deepen the crisis?”
The Parliament voted 56 to 45 against Mr. Pashinyan, with only one member of the Republican Party supporting him. He needed a simple majority of the 105-member body to win. A second such vote will be held in a week, on May 8, and if he again fails to gain a majority, the country must hold snap elections 30 to 45 days later.
Throughout the day, members of the Republican Party attacked Mr. Pashinyan, a 42-year-old former journalist and father of four, on personal grounds. They found fault with everything from his signature camouflage T-shirts to his lack of high-level political or military experience, even suggesting that he was better suite
