Russia and Ukraine Swap Dozens of Prisoners, in a ‘First Step to Stop the War’
MOSCOW — After five years of grinding conflict stoked by Russia in eastern Ukraine, the two bitterly estranged neighbors swapped dozens of prisoners on Saturday in a long-anticipated exchange that Ukraine’s new president hailed as “the first step to end the war.”
Welcoming 35 freed Ukrainians at the airport in Kiev, the president, Volodymyr Zelensky, a former comedian, said that he had spoken by telephone with Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, and reached an agreement “on the first stage to unblock our dialogue and on the first step to stop the war.”
Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany welcomed the exchange as a “hopeful sign.” Ms. Merkel has been deeply involved in the so far fruitless efforts to stop the fighting, which has killed more than 13,000 people, many of them civilians.
President Trump said on Twitter that the exchange was “very good news, perhaps a first giant step to peace.” Donald Tusk, the European Council president, said of the release, “Finally!” He wrote on Twitter, “I continue my call on Russia to release all political prisoners and respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity.”
But there is little sign that Mr. Putin, who has built his increasingly autocratic rule around appeals to Russian nationalism, is willing to stop supporting pro-Russian separatist fighters whom Ukraine views as “terrorists.” He has also firmly ruled out any possibility of returning Crimea, the Black Sea peninsula seized by Moscow in 2014, to Ukraine.
Ukraine and Russia have exchanged captives before, but those swaps mostly involved soldiers seized during fighting in the east of Ukraine. That region has been under the control of pro-Russian fighters supported by Moscow with arms, money and soldiers since 2014.
Nearly all those exchanged on Saturday had nothing to do with the fighting and were more hostages than prisoners. They included the Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov, who had been jailed in Russia after being convicted on what were widely seen as trumped-up terrorism charges, and 24 sailors detained late last year in waters near
