Jason Priestley claims he punched Harvey Weinstein in the face at 1995 Miramax party
   "90210" star Jason Priestley claims to have punched disgraced film mogul Harvey Weinstein in the face at a 1995 party. 
   Priestley, 48, made the revelation on Twitter Friday after a friend commented on actress Mira Sorvino's admission that she cried upon learning Weinstein did in fact derail her career because she refused his advances. 
   "Heartbreaking....wouldn't be surprised if this happened to my good friend @Jason_Priestley who punched Weinstein in the face at a club one night. Go Jay," Tara Strong wrote. 
   Priestley chimed in to verify the story after a user asked him to add more. 
   "'I'm not going anywhere with you' I said as I pushed him back and punched him with a right hand to his face," he recalled. 
   Priestley explained that the incident occurred at a Miramax party following the 1995 Golden Globes, where Weinstein allegedly told him he had to leave. 
   "I was leaving when he grabbed me by the arm and said 'what are you doing?' I said 'you told me leave, I'm leaving,'" he explained. 
   "'I didn't say you had to leave' he replied. 'You just told me to leave... right over there' I tell him once again. Getting heated now. He then grabs me tighter and says 'why don't we go outside and talk about this.' That was all I needed to hear..." Priestley continued, before sharing how he pushed and punched Weinstein. 
   "Suddenly, there were security guards pulling us apart and I was escorted out of the party..." the actor continued. 
   That was the extent of what Priestley shared with the social media user, but countless people chimed in and commended him, noting "a few more people needed to do that." 
   Director Peter Jackson, who worked with Weinstein on "Lord of the Rings," revealed in a recent interview what that Weinstein trashed Sorvino and Ashley Judd while they were in consideration for roles. 
   "I recall Miramax telling us they were a nightmare to work with and we should avoid them at all costs," Jackson told Fairfax New Zealand. "This was probably in 1998." 
   Both women have accused Weinstein of making unwanted sexual advances toward them. 
   "Just seeing this after I awoke, I burst out crying," Sorvino wrote on Twitter Friday in response to the interview. "There it is, confirmation that Harvey Weinstein derailed my career, something I suspected but was unsure. Thank you Peter Jackson for being honest. I'm just heartsick."   
