Mira Sorvino ‘burst out crying’ after learning how Harvey Weinstein ‘derailed’ her career 
   Actress Mira Sorvino is devastated after learning director Peter Jackson said disgraced filmmaker Harvey Weinstein urged him not to cast her in a movie. 
   Sorvino — who is among the dozens of women to accuse Weinstein of sexual misconduct — wrote in a tweet Friday that Jackson's claims confirmed her fears that Weinstein interfered with her success. 
   "Just seeing this after I awoke, I burst out crying," Sorvino began. "There it is, confirmation that Harvey Weinstein derailed my career, something I suspected but was unsure. Thank you Peter Jackson for being honest. I'm just heartsick." 
   Jackson, who worked with Weinstein and his brother Bob on "The Lord of the Rings," claimed in a recent interview that Weinstein's company, Miramax, trashed Sorvino and fellow actress Ashley Judd when they were both being considered for a spot in the movie. 
   "I recall Miramax telling us they were a nightmare to work with and we should avoid them at all costs," Jackson told Fairfax New Zealand. "This was probably in 1998." 
   Jackson's remarks come two months after Sorvino came forward to accuse Weinstein of making an unwanted sexual advance toward her in 1995 while they were inside a hotel room in Toronto. 
   "He started massaging my shoulders, which made me very uncomfortable, and then tried to get more physical, sort of chasing me around," Sorvino told The New Yorker. 
   Sorvino said she attempted to tell her story to a female staff member of Miramax after the alleged incident. 
   "Her reaction was as though I was suddenly radioactive for daring to bring it up, which gave me little encouragement," Sorvino recalled in an essay published by Time. 
   Sorvino won an Academy Award for her movie "Mighty Aphrodite," which was distributed by Miramax. 
   Judd is also among the women to accuse Weinstein of making unwanted sexual advances. Judd responded to Jackson's comments with a tweet Friday as well. 
   "I remember this well," she wrote. 
   A spokeswoman for Weinstein denied Jackson's allegations in a statement Friday. 
   "Mr. Weinstein has nothing but the utmost respect for Peter Jackson. However, as Mr. Jackson will probably remember, because Disney would not finance the "Lord of the Rings", Miramax lost the project and all casting was done by New Line," the statement reads. "While Bob and Harvey Weinstein were executive producers of the film they had no input into the casting whatsoever." 
   The rep also states Judd was cast in a pair of Weinstein movies, "Frida" and "Crossing Over," after 1998, while claiming Weinstein gave Sorvino's husband Christopher Backus a role in his TV series "SEAL" at Sorvino's request, before Backus left the gig for another opportunity. 
   Numerous women have come forward in recent months to accuse Weinstein of sexual harassment, assault or rape. 
   Weinstein has denied all allegations of non-consensual sex.   
