Israel and Gaza Brace for Round 2 of Protests at Border Fence
JERUSALEM — In Gaza City, pickup trucks and motorized rickshaws busily ferried piles of tires toward the border fence with Israel on Thursday as Palestinians planned for another day of protests on Friday, hoping that the thick black smoke from burning rubber would frustrate Israeli snipers.
In Israel, officials defended the lethal tactics used by the military at last Friday’s protest, which killed 19 Gazans. They insisted they would not back off during the second round of protests against Israel’s longstanding blockade of Gaza.
Pointing to a series of armed attacks along the Gaza border since mid-February, the Israeli Army’s chief spokesman on Thursday accused Hamas, the militant group that rules the territory, of seeking to turn the area into a battlefield. The Israelis claim that Hamas is using women and children as human shields and burning tires to create a smoke screen, all to provide cover for violent attempts to penetrate the fence and attack Israelis.
“With this we cannot live,” said Brig. Gen. Ronen Manelis, the army spokesman, noting that some Israelis lived in homes just 50 yards from the Gaza fence. “Just because no one was hurt does not mean they had no intention. They did, and we have proof.”
Hamas, which has largely assumed responsibility for organizing the protests that began last Friday, insisted it would ensure that demonstrators at the next round were unarmed. But it said it would not deter them from throwing rocks at Israeli forces.
Israel has given no indication that it would alter its course despite a storm of international criticism and a new attempt by an Israeli human rights group to persuade soldiers to disregard orders to shoot demonstrators with live ammunition. But officials also sought to defend their stance more fully on Thursday.
In a conference call with reporters, General Manelis said that on March 30, while civilians generally kept to the rear, militants hurled firebombs, crossed parts of the fence or tried to cut openings in it and fired on Israeli forces. And he hinted that while Israel did not want another war with Gaza, Hamas was running the risk of provoking one.
“We have no intention to turn these events along the fence into weekly ones,” he said. But at the same time he warned, “If events continue in this manner of terror attacks behind civil protests, we do not intend to limit our response to the fence area.”
Hamas said it would pay $3,000 each to the families of those killed in the protests, who included several members of the group’s military wing and at least one commander. The group also offered $200 to $500 to those who were wounded, depending on the extent of the injuries — prompting Israel to say the group was inciting violence by putting a “price tag” on casualties.
Muhammad Thuraya, a Hamas representative on the organizing committee for the demonstrations, said the payments were the least the group could do. “This is our duty to our people, to ease the suffering of our citizens,” he said in an interview. “This does not mean that we are promoting people for death. We will offer what we can for our people.”
Demonstrators set up a symbolic cemetery at the staging grounds for Friday’s protest to commemorate those killed last week. But the scene was otherwise almost festive. A volleyball court was set up for a competition between teams of amputees, sponsored by the son of Ismail Haniyeh, the Hamas political director. A speaker at a mock court pronounced sentences on absent “Israeli war criminals” while a small crowd watched approvingly. And Mr. Thuraya said a bride and groom would celebrate their wedding at the demonstrations on Friday afternoon.
Umm Muhammad Marzoug, 44, took her four children to the site late Thursday to look around and said they would return on Friday, despite the risks. She said the economic, social and political pressures of life in Gaza had brought her to this point.
“We live together, or we die together,” she said.
In Israel, meanwhile, a debate broke out over the military’s use of live ammunition after B’Tselem, an Israeli human rights group, placed ads in the newspapers Haaretz and Maariv calling on soldiers to disregard orders to shoot. Quoting a legal precedent as well known in Israel as the My Lai massacre is in the United States — stemming from the massacre of dozens of Arab civilians in Kafr Qasim in 1956 — the group warned that some orders were so blatantly illegal that it “pains the eye and outrages the heart, if the eye be not blind and the heart be not callous or corrupt.”
“This is part of the moral ethos of this country, something Israelis are taught in school, that army officers are taught as part of their training and that is the moral compass we’re all supposed to follow,” said Hagai El-Ad, B’Tselem’s executive director. “And we’re stating that front and center and demanding that we will follow it now.”
General Manelis would not discuss the rules of engagement for Israeli soldiers, and particularly snipers, on when to use live ammunition as opposed to rubber bullets, tear gas or other means of riot control.
But former Israeli military lawyers argued that there were plenty of situations in which firing on unarmed demonstrators could be justified.
“B’Tselem are correct as a general rule, but it’s a general rule,” said David Benjamin, who formerly served as the director of a branch of the Israel Defense Forces’ international law department and as a top legal adviser for the Gaza Strip. “An unarmed person per se doesn’t represent a major security threat, but a large number of unarmed people, for example, storming through the fence, does represent a threat. You would want to use riot control, less lethal means, at first, but live fire is an option where that fails.”
Asked about videos from March 30 showing at least one Gazan who was fatally shot in the back, Mr. Benjamin said that a peaceable demonstrator running away would not be a legal target. But someone who had participated in armed hostilities could be fair game, even while fleeing.
“He’s not immune just because he decides to take a rest,” he said.
It is not so simple to ask soldiers to arrest anyone who makes it across the fence, Mr. Benjamin said, particularly when thousands more might follow.
“Within that mob are people who are armed,” he said. “If soldiers approach the fence, they run the risk of being shot at, hit with Molotov cocktails or rolling burning tires. That’s the Hamas tactic — to mix up the terror activity with the civilians, and then it’s very difficult to respond in a way that everybody will be happy with.”
Mr. El-Ad of B’Tselem, however, insisted that there was no ambiguity about what had taken place on March 30.
“This is not complicated,” he said. “To see Israeli soldiers, inside Israel, firing live ammunition from a distance at unarmed Palestinian protesters inside the blockaded Gaza Strip, with the figures of injuries and fatalities that resulted from that — you do not need to be a legal expert to look at that and say this is outrageous, illegal, immoral and unacceptable.”
