Poison Gas Attack Reported by Syrian Anti-Government Activists
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Anti-government activists accused the Syrian government of attacking a Damascus suburb with poison gas on Saturday as Syrian forces stepped up their campaign to retake the last rebel-held pocket near the capital.
Activists in the suburb of Douma, east of Damascus, shared videos online that showed lifeless men, women and children sprawled on floors with white foam around their mouths. Other footage showed chaotic clinics where medics were hosing down patients and treating them with respirators.
The scale of the attack and the number of people killed were not immediately clear. But rescue workers estimated a death toll in the dozens.
The State Department called the reports “horrifying” in a statement and said that if they are confirmed, they “demand an immediate response by the international community.”
The attack followed weeks of punishing assaults by the Syrian government and its Russian allies against a group of rebel-held Damascus suburbs known as Eastern Ghouta. Hundreds have been killed and tens of thousands have fled or been bused out as the government has retaken the area. Douma, which is controlled by a rebel group called the Army of Islam, is the last, and the Syrian government and its supporters have made no secret of their determination to take it at any cost.
Syrian state news media denied that any chemical weapons had been used and accused the rebels of fabricating the videos to gain international sympathy.
In its statement, the State Department blamed Syria’s chief ally for the country’s past chemical attacks.
“Russia, with its unwavering support for the regime, ultimately bears responsibility for these brutal attacks, targeting of countless civilians, and the suffocation of Syria’s most vulnerable communities with chemical weapons,” it said.
A confirmed chemical attack would pose a dilemma for President Trump, who has said he will hold President Bashar al-Assad of Syria accountable for the use of chemical weapons while also saying that he wants to reduce American military involvement in Syria.
After a chemical attack by the Syrian government killed dozens of people in the village of Khan Sheikhoun last April, Mr. Trump responded by ordering the firing of 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles at the air base from which the attacks had originated.
“No child of God should ever suffer such horror,” Mr. Trump said at the time. “It is in the vital national security interest of the United States to prevent and deter the spread and use of deadly chemical weapons.”
But Mr. Trump did not follow those strikes with further military action against Mr. Assad, making it clear that the United States sought to punish Mr. Assad but not to topple him.
About 2,000 American soldiers are deployed in eastern Syria, working with local militias to fight the jihadists of the Islamic State. But Mr. Trump said last week that he would like to bring them home, too, although no timeline has been announced.
