MADRID — Wine lovers have a language of their own, filled with colorful ways to describe how the drink is made and the many sensations that it conjures up.
But when it comes to describing a wine’s actual color, should a simple word like “blue” be banned?
A handful of young entrepreneurs from the Basque region of Spain challenged the country’s wine establishment in 2015 when they started selling a blue wine.
There is no disputing the wine’s color, a neon blue that comes from adding two natural ingredients, indigo dye and anthocyanin, a pigment found in grape skin.
Yet last month, the start-up company, known as Gïk, said it was forced to remove “blue wine” from its labels and slightly change the composition of its drink, after being slapped with a fine from the Basque section of Spain’s Agriculture Ministry for violating wine regulations.
“None of us really liked normal wine, which comes with too many norms, such as whether you can take it with ice or not,” said Taig Mac Carthy, one of the co-founders of Gïk. “So our goal was clearly to offer something to people looking for a wine that was a bit more fun and crazy. The trouble is that we are trying to revolutionize an industry that has worked for centuries without making any change — and they control the rules of the game.”
Since starting production, Gïk has sold over 120,000 bottles, more than half in countries outside the European Union, like Japan, South Korea and Brazil. The company is also hoping to enter the American market soon, according to Aritz López, another co-founder.
José Luis Benítez, the general director of the Spanish Wine Federation, whose members account for three-quarters of the country’s wine production, said the federation had not started the complaint against Gïk, which was filed anonymously.
The wine sector needs to promote innovation to attract new and young consumers, Mr. Benítez acknowledged — but, he added, only within a European regulatory framework intended to protect both producers and consumers against fraud and health safety risks.
Under the European Union’s oenological regulations, whatever is not specifically authorized is considered illegal — and blue is not an approved color.
In 2008, a Spanish wine producer was also fined for marketing a “gold cava,” made by adding gold particles to the sparkling wine known as cava that is mostly produced in Catalonia.
A project like that of Gïk, Mr. Benítez said, is “a laudable corporate initiative, but you have to respect the rules of the game, and they are for everybody.”
After suspending production for over two months, Gïk is once again shipping its alcoholic drink, relabeled and now containing 99 percent wine and 1 percent grape must — so as not to fall under the category of pure wine.
But Gïk is appealing the fine and has started an online petition to get people to join its crusade against color naming restrictions for wine.
“Not being a lawyer, this whole dispute has left me with something that feels like a bad hangover,” Mr. Mac Carthy said.
