Praise for the Mueller Report, From an Unlikely Source  Oleg Deripaska
MOSCOW — The email came out of the blue, from an aide to the mysterious Russian billionaire, Oleg V. Deripaska, who is said to be close to President Vladimir V. Putin and an on-again, off-again character in the two-year investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election.
Would I be interested in interviewing Mr. Deripaska, the aide asked. It was a bit like being summoned to meet with Greta Garbo or J.D. Salinger.
Of course, I said, aware that Mr. Deripaska normally communicated, if at all, through the phalanx of lawyers and publicity agents he surrounded himself with. I wondered to myself why he had suddenly decided to speak out.
Soon enough, I found myself sitting alone in a hotel conference room, at a table bearing a gigantic fruit platter, unsure what to expect. This was, after all, a man who had emerged on top in Russia’s bloody aluminum wars in the 1990s, and was accused in United States Treasury Department documents of suspected ties to organized crime, money laundering and ordering a contract killing.
He is a man of about average stature, whose most striking feature is his large, round head. He was intense, and spoke in a robotic English, so as not to worry about mistranslations, he said.
It soon became clear that he saw the determination of the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, that the Trump administration had not colluded with Russia, at least according to a Justice Department summary of his findings, as an opening to rehabilitate his image in the West.
This despite the fact that Mr. Deripaska had refused to cooperate with the investigation, revealing for the first time that he had received written questions from the Mueller team but had declined to answer them.
“Do I feel like your president, that I am exonerated?” he said at one point. “I never felt guilty. It was annoying for me. There was this huge crush on my business, on my companies, when sanctions were put on the companies I founded.”
Over cups of special black tea from his home region, Krasnodar, he complained of the tendency of the American news media to rush to judgment and professed confidence in the United States justice system, which he said would ultimately prove his innocence of any wrongdoing.
A graduate of a prestigious physics faculty, Mr. Deripaska rose to wealth in the 1990s, strong arming his way to a virtual monopoly over the Russian aluminum industry. When it placed sanctions on him and his companies last year, the Treasury Department cited his links to the Russian government, saying he profits from the country’s “malign activity around the globe.”
Even while keeping a low profile, he pursued a costly lobbying and legal effort to assert his innocence. Initially, this revolved around sanctions on his businesses, and with the help of a global influence-buying operation he did persuade the Treasury Department 
