   The Yankees and A’s took completely different routes to the AL wild card. 
   While the Bombers were among the hottest teams in baseball out of the gate, the A’s claimed at least a share of that title during the second half of the season, winning 63 out of their final 92 games. 
   The two teams split their six-game regular season slate, which consisted of a series in May and a more-telling one just last month. 
   The Bronx Bombers took two-out-of-three back in the spring, but a lot has changed, as you can tell from Sonny Gray and Domingo German starting the first two games. 
   Luis Severino, whom Aaron Boone is betting on to advance the Yankees on Wednesday night, pitched a solid six innings, striking out seven, while allowing just one run, five hits and two walks. 
   Severino was then relieving any doubt he was the rotation’s bona fide ace, en route to a monstrous first half that saw him go 14-2 alongside a 2.31 ERA. 
   The 24-year-old’s second half struggles have been well-documented. He’s gone 5-6 with an ugly 5.57 ERA next to nine home runs and 76 strike outs. 
   Severino took what turned out to be a wild card test-run against the A’s on Sept.5, though it didn’t go well at all. 
   He was yanked after just two innings after surrendering five earned runs, six total. 
   There were also communication issues between Severino and his battery-mate, Gary Sanchez, who had two passed balls and couldn’t handle two wild pitches. Severino and Sanchez said the reason they weren’t on the same page was they were using new hand signals for pitch calls. 
   Even after that, Boone expressed confidence in the pair, foreshadowing his eventual decision to go with Severino in Wednesday’s wild-card game, with Sanchez behind the plate. 
   Severino did have one other start against Oakland this season, way back in May when he was still pitching like a Cy Young candidate. He shut them down in that game, going six innings, allowing one run while striking out seven. 
   The Yankees have to hope they get that Severino on the mound on Wednesday in the Bronx. 
