   The Yankees and A’s, two teams well acclimated to the highly-debated wild card system, will battle it out Wednesday night for a chance to take on Boston in the ALDS. 
   Let’s take a look at the Bronx Bombers’ history in the do-or-die wild card game, infamously introduced for the 2012 season. 
   Yankees vs. Astros | 2015 | 3-0 L 
   Who could forget the Yankees’ first season in over two decades without Derek Jeter in pinstripes? 
   The Yanks surprised many and finished second in the AL East behind the Blue Jays, setting up a wild-card date with the upstart Astros, who had just come off their first winning season in seven years. If only the Blue Jays didn’t pull off a ridiculous second-half run to win the division. Dallas Keuchel came into the Bronx and dominated the Bombers, striking out seven while only allowing three hits in six innings. Meanwhile, Masahiro Tanaka struggled with command and dug the Yanks a three-run hole, one they failed to overcome as Houston’s bullpen shut it down in relief. Kansas City eventually ended the Astros’ postseason in the ALDS before taking down the Mets in the World Series. 
   Yankees vs. Twins | 2017 | 8-4 W  
   Similar to the ’15 season, the Yankees weren’t expected to make a playoff run last year. They did, however, thanks to the emergence of Baby Bombers Aaron Judge, Gary Sanchez and Luis Severino. But a nightmare Severino start pinned the Yanks behind 3-0 before fans could even have a bite of their overpriced Yankee Stadium hot dog. The ace only picked up one out before being relieved, making the shortest postseason start in Yankees history. Thankfully for Yankees fans, Didi Gregorius’ three-run homer tied the game in the bottom half of the inning, while Brett Gardner followed with a dinger himself in the second and the Yanks never looked back. The Yanks ended up one win away from going to the World Series, but those pesky Astros knocked them out again. 
   The A’s are 0-1 in wild card games, losing to the Royals in 2014. 
