No Dogs in the House
Australia Diary collects reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. Want to share your story, photo, poem or video? Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
On a school night in 2006, my dad told me to get in the car for a quick ride.
I was sixteen, a little lonely and had mentioned to my parents that I’d like a dog. In my neighborhood in Sydney’s predominately white Sutherland Shire, everyone seemed to have one and I didn’t feel that we, as Egyptian-Australians, should be any different.
When I first saw Max, a huge seven-year-old boxer, tawny save for his white chest paws, I felt immediate and visceral fear.
He looked so aggressive — nothing like the harmless childhood fantasies of lassie types, slender and golden with bushy tails and playful demeanors.
No, this was a man’s dog: Strong, muscular and dangerous.
Our first encounter was abrupt. He sat heavy on my lap in the front seat the whole ride home, looking back dolefully at the owner who he left behind.
I too was feeling a little torn; even then, I knew what lay ahead — the inevitable arguments about whether Max would be an “inside” or an “outside” dog.
Coming from an Egyptian-Australian family, dogs were treated with a kind but practical sense of reserve. There was warmth, yes, but none of that cloying affection that our Anglo neighbors had for their pets.
This was an animal, well-liked but by no means a “member of the family.”
When we got him in the house my mum and sisters leapt into protest about his ugly face, the sheer size of him and the possibility that he was a biter. They quickly declared that he would sleep outside.
Within mere days, Max had migrated from the backyard, to the doormat, and then, eventually, to wherever the hell he liked.
It was his expression of adorable sincerity that melted my parents’ resolve. He was also talented, able to perform tricks like “play dead,” “shake” and “sit.”
Unlike the other dogs we had randomly collected throughout my childhood, he seemed to listen and, astoundingly, to understand. He would routinely go for walks around the neighborhood by himself and then come back on his own accord: sometime we didn’t notice that he had done so, save for the open gate left swinging in his wake.
Boxers are European dogs, and Max suffered admirably through the extremes of the scorching Australian summer, panting heavily for months on end while enormous horseflies bit his thin ears raw and bloody scabs formed. Where the chemical solution from the vet failed, dad concocted an altogether more ethnic remedy of vinegar and kerosene, more suited to a bonfire than to a medical treatment.
By then, my mum, with her feigned apathy, had also fallen prey to Max’s charms. Once, when she didn’t know anyone was looking, I saw her pet him and call him “habibi,” which is Arabic for “sweetheart" or, more dramatically, “beloved.”
Then he got sick. It wasn’t like the time he got pancreatitis because we were feeding him the wrong kind of food, or when he hurt his eye playing fetch at the park. It came on suddenly and gave no warning signs.
He died quietly in the night. Dad and I dug a hole for him in the backyard before I left for work that morning. Afterward, while cleaning up the mess he left after suffering what we think was a stroke, I cried bitterly.
We had a funeral for Max later that day. We sat outside, in silence, in an open forum seating square, Arab-style. It was only half in jest.
I miss him and think of him often, lying across my lap or at my feet: an “inside dog” to the last.
