Specter of Meddling by Beijing Looms Over Taiwan’s Elections
TAIPEI, Taiwan — As Taiwan prepares to hold local elections on Saturday, concerns are growing that Beijing’s long effort to sway the island’s politics has been armed with a new weapon: a Russia-style influence campaign.
The island’s elections for city mayors and county and village leaders will in part serve as a report card on President Tsai Ing-wen, whose administration has come under immense pressure from Beijing. But Taiwan officials are sounding alarms at what they say is a campaign by Beijing to spread disinformation that serves its agenda by exploiting the island’s freewheeling public discourse.
“There are those people who mistakenly think that if you simply shout falsehoods loudly, they’ll become real,” Ms. Tsai wrote on Facebook last week. “We must not let them succeed.”
Taiwan officials say the population of 23 million is regularly fed misleading information in the news media and on social networks that range from unverified footage of large-scale Chinese military drills to false reports of stranded travelers being abandoned by the island’s government.
The onslaught of misinformation seems aimed at undermining the Tsai administration and her governing Democratic Progressive Party, which that leans toward independence, while helping politicians deemed more sympathetic to Beijing and unification who are typically with the opposition Kuomintang.
China’s ruling Communist Party considers Taiwan part of its territory, and wants to bring the democratic island under its control. Ms. Tsai became president in May 2016 and has refused to meet China’s demand that she endorse Beijing’s so-called One China principle, which holds that the mainland and the island are part of a single country.
In response, Beijing has sought to isolate Taiwan by drawing away its diplomatic allies, pressuring companies to erase references to Taiwan as a separate country and stepping up military drills.
The Taiwan authorities say they suspect that Beijing is also illegally funneling money to political campaigns through Taiwan businesses in mainland China. Late last month, the government said that it was building cases against candidates who were being funded by Beijing and that it had shut down two underground money exchanges through which funds earmarked for influencing the election had been flowing.
Taiwan’s government fears the use of social media misinformation campaigns are a new front for meddling.
Beijing denies engaging in any kind of interference in Taiwan.
A spokesman for China’s Taiwan Affairs Office, Ma Xiaoguang, described Ms. Tsai’s Facebook comments as “fake news” and “not even worth refuting.”
Mr. Ma said wider allegations about meddling were “completely fabricated out of thin air. We hope our Taiwanese compatriots won’t believe it.”
But the propaganda war goes back seven decades, with attacks originating from both sides of the Taiwan Strait.
Many years after the Kuomintang government fled to the island after its defeat by the Communists in 1949, each side continued sending the other balloons carrying propaganda. They filled the airwaves with propaganda in slogans, news and music.
In 1996, by which time the Kuomintang had effectively given up its claim on the mainland, China fired missiles toward Taiwan in the days before the island’s first democratic presidential election in an attempt to intimidate voters from casting ballots for the democratic reformer Lee Teng-hui. But the effort 
