Hunger Strike Creates Unwanted Backdrop for Russia During World Cup
MOSCOW — A praised Ukrainian film director imprisoned in Russia has been turning down food for a month, attracting international support and creating an unwanted backdrop for Moscow as the World Cup is underway.
“Time is running out,” the writer Stephen King tweeted in an appeal for the director on Friday, “and he may die for his views.”
The director, Oleg Sentsov, is waging the hunger strike to protest the detention of his fellow Ukrainians.
Both sides in the four-year-old Russia-Ukraine conflict hold dozens of people deemed by the other to be political hostages.
The timing of Mr. Sentsov’s strike has also raised the grim prospect that his jailers could resort to force-feeding him.
Relatives of Mr. Sentsov had hoped he would be freed in a prisoner exchange before the soccer tournament began. Instead, the opening matches have coincided with the end of the first month of his strike — a time when Russian wardens have in the past begun force-feeding hunger strikers.
Mr. Sentsov, who has won recognition on the European film festival circuit, was living in Crimea when Russia annexed the peninsula from Ukraine in 2014. He became a prominent opponent of the annexation.
Russian prosecutors accused him of going beyond peaceful protest by setting fires and plotting to blow up a Lenin statue, and a court sentenced him to 20 years in prison.
Mr. Sentsov denies carrying out or planning violent acts. Russia says he is a Russian citizen because he lived in Crimea, which is now part of Russia. Mr. Sentsov says he is Ukrainian.
Mr. Sentsov, 41, is being held in a prison for hardened criminals, nicknamed the Polar Bear, in the Arctic town of Labytnangi.
The campaign to free Mr. Sentsov has picked up with the opening of the World Cup. The filmmakers Pedro Almodóvar and Wim Wenders are among those who have rallied to Mr. Sentsov’s cause.
On Wednesday, the day before the tournament began, the European Parliament passed a resolution demanding Mr. Sentsov’s release and calling him one of 70 Ukrainian “political prisoners” being held in Russia.
It is unclear whether the attention has helped the chances of Mr. Sentsov’s release.
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has played down the possibility of a swap that includes Mr. Sentsov. Earlier this month, he said Mr. Sentsov should not be traded for a Russian journalist held in Kiev, Ukraine’s capital, because the cases were not comparable.
On both sides, the prisoners’ fates have been tied up with the on-again-off-again di
