‘OK, boomer’ — Millennial lawmaker shuts down heckler during climate change speech in New Zealand’s Parliament
   “OK, boomer.” 
   The catchphrase that has gone viral among millennials and Gen Z members has made its way into the Parliament of New Zealand.  
   A 25-year-old lawmaker used the popular retort this week to casually shut down a fellow parliament member who appeared to heckle her during a climate change speech, drawing criticism from upset baby boomers while delighting teens and young adults around the world.  
   Chlöe Swarbrick, a member of the Green Party, was discussing a bill aimed at reducing the country’s carbon emissions, noting that her generation and the ones after hers “do not have the luxury” of ignoring climate change.  
   “In the year 2050, I will be 56 years old. Yet, right now, the average age of this 52nd parliament is 49 years old,” Swarbrick said while at least one of her colleagues yelled something indiscernible at her. 
   “OK, boomer,” she quickly replied before continuing her speech. 
   The phrase has been widely used on social media to respond to condescending remarks by older generations. It stems from a viral TikTok video in which a man lashes out at young people for having a “Peter Pan syndrome” and never wanting to grow up. 
   His rant led to thousands of reactions by teens and young adults responding to the video with just two words: “OK, boomer.”  
   A conservative radio host even equated the phrase to the n-word in a bizarre comparison that was widely mocked on Twitter and even corrected by Dictionary.com.  
   Swarbrick, who was elected in 2017, said her reaction to this week’s heckling angered some of her critics, but she refused to apologize. 
   “Today I have learnt that responding succinctly and in perfect jest to somebody heckling you about *your age* as you speak about the impact of climate change on *your generation* with the literal title of their generation makes some people very mad,” she wrote Tuesday on Facebook. “So I guess millennials ruined humour. That, or we just need to pull ourselves up by our bootstraps and abstain from avocados.”   
