   Koala bears continue to perish as vicious wildfires decimate their habitat in what wildlife experts called a “national tragedy.” 
   The number of human dead rose to four, with more than 200 homes destroyed in New South Wales alone, reported Radio New Zealand (RNZ). In all, since last week, more than 300 homes have been destroyed in the two states and thousands have evacuated, reported USA Today. 
   The bears are just one of the many species whose homes are being scorched by fires that have torched more than 2.5 million acres in Queensland and New South Wales states. 
   In Queensland, a “Noah’s Ark Bus” transferred more than 150 orphaned and injured animals from a wildlife sanctuary to safety over the weekend, Australia’s ABC News reported Tuesday. 
   Staff at Cooberrie Pak Wildlife Sanctuary boxed and bussed birds, small reptiles, crocodiles, koalas and monkeys from the 25-acre park in central Queensland. The center takes in wildlife that has been injured and abandoned. 
   As many as 400 koalas have died in the Port Macquarie region alone, about halfway between Sydney and Brisbane, reported “The Today Show” of Australia on Wednesday. 
   “We are very, very concerned,” Koala Conservation Australia President Sue Ashton said, according to USA Today. “If the wind picks up, we could lose even more habitat and more koalas. It’s just so unpredictable – we don’t know what will happen.” 
   “It’s a national tragedy,” said Port Macquarie Koala Hospital clinical director Cheyne Flanagan, according to USA Today. 
   The Koala Hospital Fort Macquarie has taken in at least 16 of the besieged bears, and posted video of one taking a long, desperately needed draft of water. 
   But the damage goes beyond the loss of life, and will last much longer than the fires, as the Australian Reptile Park’s Dan Rumsey told “The Today Show.” 
   “Not only are they dying, but their homes have been decimated,” he said. “That could take tens of years to regenerate. They will have no food. It means they will have to move around looking for food.” 
   And that’s not all they’ll be looking for, he cautioned. 
   “Keep an eye out for wildlife on the move, particularly on the roads,” Rumsey said. “They are looking for new homes.”   
