Emergency declared in Australian state as wildfire smoke visible in New Zealand
   A week-long state of emergency was declared in the Australian state of New South Wales as officials predicted “catastrophic fire danger” for the Greater Sydney area and two other regions on the east coast. 
   Residents were urged to gravitate toward urban areas, shopping malls or any facility “well away from bushland areas,” the New South Wales Rural Fire Service said in a release. The warnings across Australia’s most populous state were in effect for Tuesday. 
   This “could be the most dangerous bushfire week this nation has ever seen,” New South Wales state Emergency Services Minister David Elliott told the Associated Press. 
   More than 600 schools and technical colleges have been closed Tuesday in anticipation of the fire risk, and 1,500 firefighters are working at least 60 fires across New South Wales, AP said. 
   The smoke could be seen on satellite images billowing 2,500 miles across the ocean to drift over New Zealand, reported CNN. 
   Since Friday, three people have died, more than 150 homes have been destroyed, and more than 3,800 square miles of forest and farmland have been torched, AP said. Upwards of 100 more people were treated for injuries related to the fires, AP reported, 20 firefighters among them, Ambulance Commissioner Dominic Morgan told AP. 
   Queensland State also saw nine homes destroyed on Monday, and residents were told not to go outside, AP said. 
   New South Wales Premier Gladys Berejiklian urged residents to obey the orders and stay safe, reported ABC News Australia. 
   “With catastrophic weather conditions predicted for this week, particularly Tuesday with hot weather and strong winds, I have decided to take the Commissioner’s advice and make this declaration,” she said, according to ABC. “No matter where you are … everybody has to assume the worst, and we cannot allow complacency to creep in.” 
   The severity underscored the urgency of the climate crisis, especially as the fires were not unexpected. In April and again in September, former New South Wales fire chief Greg Mullins and 22 other previous emergency chiefs – part of a group called Emergency Leaders for Climate Action – predicted a bushfire crisis such as this, reported CNN. 
   “Unprecedented dryness; reductions in long-term rainfall; low humidity; high temperatures; wind velocities; fire danger indices; fire spread and ferocity; instances of pyro-convective fires (fire storms – making their own weather); early starts and late finishes to bushfire seasons,” wrote Mullins in an op-ed for The Sydney Morning Herald on Monday. “An established long-term trend driven by a warming, drying climate. The numbers don’t lie, and the science is clear.” 
   He attributed the ferocity definitively to climate change. 
   “If anyone tells you, ‘This is part of a normal cycle,’ or, ‘We’ve had fires like this before,’ smile politely and walk away, because they don’t know what they’re talking about.”   
