   The man accused of strangling British backpacker Grace Millane to death last year following a Tinder date, admitted to putting her body in a suitcase but denies killing her, according to an interview recording played in court this week. 
   In the recorded interview with authorities, the 27-year-old man, whose name is withheld for legal reasons, told authorities that he and Millane didn’t say goodbye after their Dec. 1 date as he’d previously claimed, but went back to his apartment and had “violent sex” before she died, according to the New Zealand Herald Friday. 
   He said kissing turned to conversation, which turned to a discussion about the movie “Fifty Shades of Grey.” 
   In the recording, which was played this week for Auckland High Court, the defendant admitted, “I remember putting Grace in the suitcase,” BBC News reports. 
   The pair first matched on Tinder and went out together Dec. 1, the night before Millane would have turned 22. 
   According to the recording, Millane and the defendant initially engaged in "normal ... very placid” sex, before he claims Millane encouraged him to bite her. 
   “We started having more, I guess, violent sex,” the defendant told authorities before they “ended up on the floor” and took intimate pictures of one another before “she told me to hold her throat and go harder.” 
   The defendant insists Millane was a driving force with the rougher sex, and that he subsequently went to the bathroom, passing out in the shower, the Herald reports. 
   After waking up, the defendant says he realized Millane hadn’t left as he’d thought but had “blood coming from her nose.” 
   “I was very scared and called out to her and tried to move her to see if she was awake,” the accused insisted, adding that he remembers placing her in the luggage. “I was just in shock, I couldn’t put her in, it didn’t seem right. It didn’t seem right.” 
   Ultimately, he went to purchase bleach while her body was left “half in half out of the suitcase" in his hotel room. 
   Millane’s body was also in the luggage when the defendant went on another Tinder date. 
   Eventually, he said he transported the suitcase via a “hire car” and buried it in a shallow grave outside Auckland. 
   The man says he “was in shock” after finding Millane dead and after burying her, he tried to take his own life by overdosing. 
   The defendant said he didn’t contact emergency services because, “There’s a dead person in my room, I thought it looked terrible.” 
   When his lawyer asked why he chose to change his initial story, the accused responded, “I want her family to know that it wasn’t intentional," and he hopes they “have closure."   
