Iran Picks Former Nuclear Negotiator to Lead Its U.N. Mission
An Iranian diplomat who helped to negotiate the 2015 nuclear agreement will be Iran’s ambassador to the United Nations, state media said Tuesday, filling a vacancy that had lasted five months.
The appointment of the envoy, Majid Takht Ravanchi, 60, was considered a sign that Iran will try to preserve the agreement, even though the Trump administration has renounced it, reimposing onerous sanctions and taking other steps to isolate the country.
Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, also has increasingly criticized the nuclear agreement for showing what he called the mistake of trusting the United States and other Western powers that were parties to the accord. But Ayatollah Khamenei has not repudiated the accord, which was meant to end Iran’s economic isolation in return for its verified promises of peaceful nuclear work.
The ambassador job at the United Nations is considered Iran’s most important foreign diplomatic posting. Mr. Takht Ravanchi will be the highest-ranking Iranian official in the United States, which has no diplomatic relations with Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi has held a number of posts, including serving as Iran’s ambassador to Switzerland, deputy United Nations ambassador, deputy foreign minister and special assistant to the foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif. His current role is as a political adviser to President Hassan Rouhani.
He also was a senior member of the Iranian team of negotiators in the talks that led to the nuclear agreement, and is considered close to Mr. Zarif, the American-educated diplomat who was the lead negotiator for Iran in those talks and is a former United Nations ambassador.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi’s appointment was suggested by Mr. Zarif, according to a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, Bahram Qassemi, who made the announcement carried by Iranian news websites.
Political analysts said the choice of Mr. Takht Ravanchi was notable partly because it suggested that Mr. Zarif’s own influence in the Iranian hierarchy, which had become murkier in recent weeks, might have rebounded.
When Ayatollah Khamenei invited the president of Syria, Bashar al-Assad, to visit in February, Mr. Zarif was not even invited, in what was widely seen as a snub to Mr. Zarif and a victory for the hard-line factions in Iran who see him as insufficiently hostile to the West. He offered to resign, but Mr. Rouhani asked him to stay.
“The appointment of Takht Ravanchi, instead of a fire-breathing hard-liner, suggests that Iran will for now stay in the nuclear deal and continue an outward-looking foreign policy,” said Cliff Kupchan, chairman of the Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy, who has closely followed the nuclear agreement’s uncertain future.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi replaces Gholamali Khoshroo, who also is a former ambassador to Switzerland and is close to Mr. Zarif. Mr. Khoshroo left the United Nations ambassador post last November after nearly four years.
News of Mr. Takht Ravanchi’s appointment came a day after the Trump administration escalated its pressure campaign against Iran by designating the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, a powerful arm of the Iranian military, as a foreign terrorist organization.
The designation imposed wide-ranging sanctions on the Guards Corps, which is heavily immersed in a range of Iranian industries. The American step made it risky for foreign companies to engage with businesses partly or wholly owned by the Guards Corps.
The Iranian government responded by designating the United States Central Command as a terrorist organization. Mr. Rouhani, in a speech on Tuesday, called the United States the “world’s leading terrorist.”
Recalling an American warship’s downing of an Iranian passenger jet in the Persian Gulf in 1988, which killed all 290 aboard, Mr. Rouhani said Mr. Trump’s declaration smacked of hypocrisy.
“You shot down our passenger plane and now you are speaking of fighting terrorism?” he said.
The United States acknowledged errors in that episode and expressed regret for the loss of life but did not hold any service members accountable.
