Special Envoys Were Once Disdained Under Trump. Now They’re Popping Up All Over.
WASHINGTON — Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced Thursday that he was appointing a special envoy to handle negotiations with North Korea. Just days earlier, he introduced special envoys for Iran and Syria, equally knotty problems. Another for Afghanistan is said to be in the offing.
In its early days, the Trump administration slashed the number of special envoys, seeing them as an unnecessary bureaucratic layer. R.C. Hammond, a top official, routinely bemoaned that there were more than 60 such envoys, making the department’s organizational chart look like a starburst.
But Mr. Pompeo is a man in a hurry. Frustrated with a nomination process that has been slowed by White House missteps, a lengthy blacklist against onetime Trump critics and increasing partisanship on Capitol Hill, he is moving to bring in highly experienced diplomats to coordinate policy on the most difficult issues he faces.
No administration in modern American history has had its top diplomats confirmed at a slower rate. Forty-three embassies have no ambassador, and some of the world’s most strategically important countries — Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar, Pakistan and Australia — still have no nominees.
The department’s bureaus for East Asian and Pacific affairs and for South and Central Asian affairs, vital centers for coordinating and implementing policy, do not have nominees for their top slots. And only one of the department’s six under secretary positions has a Senate-confirmed appointee.
On his first trip overseas as secretary of state, Mr. Pompeo said his top goals were to energize a discouraged staff and fill dozens of diplomatic posts left empty by his predecessor, Rex W. Tillerson.
“That’s my mission set: to build that esprit and get that team on the field,” Mr. Pompeo said, a promise he has often repeated.
He has had modest success, announcing 16 ambassadorial nominations in August alone. And the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, eager to get diplomats in place, has rushed hearings in many cases. The nomination of David Hale to become the department’s third-ranked diplomat moved through the committee in about a month.
But there is a widely held perception even among Republicans in Congress that the Trump administration does little to vet its nominees, with Senate staff members discovering controversies and lawsuits — often through simple Google searches — never mentioned in paperwork that is supposed to be all-encompassing. In a confirmation hearing on Thursday, Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon, took to task David T. Fischer, a Michigan car dealer who has been nominated to become ambassador to Morocco, for failing to list in his materials a lawsuit in which Mr. Fischer played an important role.
Mr. Merkley asked Mr. Fischer to provide the committee with a detailed explanation of the case, a request Mr. Fischer promised to fulfill. Such belated back-and-forths often delay confirmations by weeks or months.
Another nomination that is in limbo is that of Doug Manchester, nominated to be ambassador to the Bahamas, who last year described the sovereign state as, “for all intents and purposes,” a protectorate of the United States, a description that was not well received on the islands, which have historical ties to Britain.
“There’s a great frustration with our friends, who say there’s no one to talk to. And Pompeo can’t do it all himself,” said James J. Carafano, a fellow at the Heritage Foundation and a member of the Trump transition team, who added that the department’s many vacancies were “a self-inflicted wound.”
Special envoys do not need to go through a confirmation process, and White House approval for the selections is said to be more lenient. Last week, Mr. Pompeo announced the appointment of James F. Jeffrey as a special envoy for Syria. In 2016, Mr. Jeffrey was one of 50 senior Republican national security officials to sign a letter saying Mr. Trump “would put at risk our country’s national security and well-being.”
The White House has avoided those who signed such letters for Senate-confirmed slots.
“Pompeo has to construct a team and fast, and appointing special envoys is one way to do that,” said Thomas A. Shannon, who recently retired as the department’s highest-ranking career diplomat. “And I think these latest choices are inspired.”
Stephen E. Biegun, an executive at the Ford Motor Company and a White House aide in the George W. Bush administration, was named on Thursday by Mr. Pompeo to be the senior envoy leading negotiations with North Korea. The two will head to Pyongyang next week, which will be Mr. Pompeo’s fourth trip there.
Mr. Pompeo canceled a July meeting with top Indian diplomats to make his third trip to Pyongyang, a decision that caused bruised feelings in New Delhi — a reminder of how much help he needs.
“It’s a great move to have a special envoy, and it shows the administration is maturing,” said Joseph Y. Yun, the previous special envoy for North Korea, who retired in February.
Negotiations with North Korea have stalled in recent months over Mr. Pompeo’s demand that Pyongyang demonstrate tangible steps toward eliminating its nuclear and ballistic weapons programs, and his insistence that North Korea will not get any relief from economic sanctions until the denuclearization process is complete.
North Korea has termed these demands “gangster-like,” has asked that the United States issue an end-of-war declaration as a confidence-building measure, and has insisted that economic sanctions be lifted reciprocally as Pyongyang pares back its weapons programs.
