Cambodian Court Sentences Australian Filmmaker to 6 Years for Espionage
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia — An Australian filmmaker who has been outspoken about human rights abuses in Cambodia, and who was arrested while filming an opposition political rally, was sentenced on Friday to six years in prison for espionage.
The filmmaker, James Ricketson, 69, has been in jail since June of last year, when he was detained while flying a drone with an attached camera over the rally. During Mr. Ricketson’s two-week trial, which ended Thursday, prosecutors never said for what country he was supposed to have spied.
But as evidence against him, prosecutors introduced emails Mr. Ricketson had sent to Cambodian opposition figures, along with a draft version of a letter he sent to Australia’s leader outlining abuses by the Cambodian government. Mr. Ricketson had been working on a documentary about the opposition.
His arrest came as Cambodia’s prime minister, Hun Sen, was overseeing a large-scale crackdown on dissent and the press, under which the opposition party was outlawed and dissolved, its leader was imprisoned on treason charges and a number of journalists, rights workers and opposition politicians were arrested or fled the country.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia, asked about the case on Friday during a trip to Indonesia, said the government had previously contacted the Cambodian authorities about it. He said it was best “to deal with these things calmly and directly.”
Foreign Minister Marise Payne said Mr. Ricketson “must now consider his response to the court’s decision using the avenues open to him under Cambodian law. The Australian government will consider what further appropriate support we can provide after that time.”
Relatives of Mr. Ricketson have said that Australia’s assistance in the case has been minimal.
During the trial, Mr. Ricketson repeatedly demanded to know what country he was accused of conducting espionage for. He said his communications with Cambodian opposition politicians were normal for a filmmaker trying to coordinate with his sources, and that as an Australian citizen, he was accustomed to being free to express his beliefs in letters to politicians.
Mr. Ricketson’s letter to Malcolm Turnbull, then Australia’s prime minister, outlined rights abuses carried out by Mr. Hun Sen’s government and urged him not to receive the Cambodian leader in Australia. Prosecutors accused him of “inciting hatred” of Cambodia with the letter.
In March, Mr. Turnbull hosted a meeting of Southeast Asian leaders, including Mr. Hun Sen, over the objections of activists who said Australia was ignoring human rights abuses in the region.
Australia’s position with Cambodia is a delicate one. In 2014, it reached an agreement to pay the country about $35 million to resettle asylum-seekers Australia was holding on the Pacific island of Nauru, after detaining them at sea as they tried to reach Australia’s shores. Rights groups said the deal showed little concern for refugees' welfare, and only a few have settled in Cambodia since it was signed.
Mr. Morrison, then Australia’s immigration minister, oversaw the agreement and was criticized for toasting it over Champagne with a member of Mr. Hun Sen’s cabinet.
In a statement Friday, Human Rights Watch said Mr. Ricketson’s case showed that Australia’s “softly, quietly” approach to Southeast Asian strongmen “is not just morally bankrupt — it’s also totally ineffective.”
Sam Rainsy, a Cambodian opposition figure living overseas, to whom Mr. Ricketson wrote several of the emails presented as evidence in court, called the verdict “revolting.”
Mr. Ricketson has a reputation in Phnom Penh as a gadfly driven to alleviate injustices large and small, often through letter-writing campaigns and flurries of posts on his personal blog, where he has criticized senior Cambodian officials and heads of local charities, among others.
He frequently expressed distress over the mistreatment of people detained in Cambodian jails, where he often visited prisoners in whom he had taken an interest, from an elderly man accused of molesting children to a young Taiwanese woman accused of drug smuggling.
Now, after 15 months of detention himself, he has complained that conditions in Prey Sar prison in Phnom Penh are filthy, corruption rampant and medical care nearly nonexistent. His children say he has health problems, and in a statement Friday they said they feared he might die in the prison.
“We’re not sure how long he can endure the conditions he is forced to live in Prey Sar prison, where he is subject to cramped quarters, lack of sleep, subsistence food and close to zero medical care,” they said.
“We are in utter shock at this outcome and that James, an innocent Australian, has been sentenced so harshly.”
Although Mr. Ricketson was defiant early in his imprisonment and insisted he had done no wrong, more recently he wrote a letter of apology to Mr. Hun Sen, saying that his previous comments had been “disruptive and ill-informed.”
“These statements were made from a place of foreign naivety and ignorance about the complexities and difficulties of governing Cambodia,” he wrote.
