‘Stansted 15’ Protesters Who Blocked U.K. Deportation Flight Avoid Prison Terms
LONDON — A judge on Wednesday handed suspended sentences and community service to 15 people who broke into Stansted Airport, north of London, to ground a flight removing migrants from Britain.
The group entered the international airport in March 2017, after cutting through a fence and chaining themselves together on the tarmac near a jet that was chartered by the British Home Office to expel migrants to Ghana and Nigeria. Flights were disrupted at the airport for several hours.
Three of the defendants, Alistair Tamlit, Edward Thacker and Melanie Strickland, were sentenced to nine months in jail, suspended for 18 months, the BBC reported from the court. The others received 12 months of community service, including carrying out unpaid work.
“In normal circumstances, only a normal custodial sentence would have been justified in this case, but in your case I accept that your intentions were to demonstrate,” Judge Christopher Morgan told the defendants in court.
The protesters, who became known as the Stansted 15, were charged last year under a rarely used law that was passed in 1990 in response to the Lockerbie bombing, a terrorist attack that brought down Pan Am Flight 103 over a town in Scotland, killing 270 people.
The charges carried a maximum penalty of life in prison, and in December some public figures and human rights organizations criticized the convictions by a jury at Chelmsford Crown Court, to the northeast of London. Amnesty International said that the charges were excessive and that they could discourage others from taking nonviolent action in defense of human rights.
Diane Abbott, an opposition Labour lawmaker who speaks for the party on home affairs, wrote in a tweet on Wednesday, “Civil disobedience has been used for centuries to challenge injustice.”
“The Stansted 15’s campaign against brutal charter flight deportations was simply another example of this,” she added.
Chris Long, the chief crown prosecutor for the east of England, said in an emailed statement on Wednesday, “The evidence in the case supported the charge — that their serious actions were likely to risk the safe operation of the aerodrome.”
The defendants pleaded not guilty to the charges and are appealing their convictions.
Melanie Evans, a charity worker, was one of the six people who cut the fence and helped carry blockade materials to the side of the parked Boeing 767 jet. She said that the group’s view was that Britain was compromising the safety of the migrants who were to board the flight.
“At the time of our action, it seemed that there was no just way to protect these people because they were so quickly and secretly snatched away,” Ms. Evans said in a phone interview on Wednesday.
Ms. Evans said she knew what she was doing was against the law, but she said she had expected a charge of aggravated trespassing, which has been used in previous cases.
Raj Chada, who represented the defendants in court, said in a statement that the charges amounted to using “counterterrorism legislation.”
“While we are relieved that none of our clients face a custodial sentence, today is still a sad day for justice,” he said, adding that the group “will continue to fight in the appeal courts to get these wrongful convictions overturned.”
Protesters in Britain and other countries have staged similar protests to try to halt deportation flights. In July, a woman in Sweden refused to sit down in a Turkish Airlines flight, trying to block the removal of an Afghan man from the country. The woman, Elin Ersson, live-streamed the video, drawing praise from around the world, but she faces a fine or a prison sentence of up to six months if convicted of violating a Swedish aviation law.
Last year, Prime Minister Theresa May apologized after some members of the “Windrush generation,” who came to Britain legally from colonies or former colonies from 1948 to 1973, were threatened with deportation because they could not prove they were residing in the country legally.
But this week, the Home Office was organizing a charter flight to Jamaica to transport deportees. The Guardian newspaper said it would be the first such flight since March 2017.
The Home Office would not confirm the details of the flight, but a spokesman said in an email on Wednesday that “all individuals on this charter flight are serious criminals.”
