Istanbul Apartment Building Collapses, Killing at Least 3
ISTANBUL — An eight-story apartment building collapsed in eastern Istanbul on Wednesday afternoon, killing at least three people, officials said.
The governor of Istanbul, Ali Yerlikaya, initially said that two people had died and that six had been rescued, the Demiroren News Agency reported. On Thursday, officials announced that crews had rescued a total of 13 people, including a 5-year-old girl, and recovery efforts were still underway.
There were 14 apartments in the building in the working-class district of Kartal, with a total of about 30 residents, Zeki Dag, an administrator in the Orhantepe neighborhood, told CNNTurk. Mr. Dag said relatives had told him that 15 people had been buried in the collapse, which happened at 4:42 p.m. local time.
There was no indication of what caused the collapse. More than 50 emergency workers were sent to the scene, and the governor said the search for people in the rubble would continue into the night.
Mr. Yerlikaya said he could not confirm the number of people thought to be caught under the debris. “There are various numbers,” he said in televised remarks, adding that he wanted confirmation before announcing anything. “The incident is very fresh right now, and there is only one thing we are focused on, which is saving lives,” he said.
Security camera footage showed the building falling into a cloud of dust, as pedestrians fled in panic. Several cars were destroyed.
The Istanbul prosecutor’s office has started an investigation into the cause of the collapse. Turkey has a history of low-quality construction, a factor that was blamed for the high death toll in the 1999 earthquake that struck near Izmit, about 55 miles southeast of Istanbul. More than 17,000 people were killed in the magnitude 7.4 earthquake, and tens of thousands of buildings were destroyed. In the aftermath, the government has pushed to modernize aging urban dwellings.
Mr. Yerlikaya said that the building that collapsed on Wednesday had a permit for five stories when it was built in 1992, and that the top three floors were illegal. He said there was also an unlicensed textile workshop on the ground floor.
A natural gas explosion and aging infrastructure were blamed for a building collapse last month in the Russian city of Magnitogorsk that killed 39 people. An explosion in Paris, also last month, that left three people dead was also blamed on a gas leak.
