Minnie Driver Calls for ‘Truth and Reconciliation’ Model to Combat Sexual Assault
LONDON — The British actress Minnie Driver, who recently resigned from her role as an Oxfam ambassador after revelations of sexual misconduct by staff members at the charity, said on Tuesday that the conversation around sexual assault should be based on a model similar to a truth and reconciliation commission to heal wounds and move forward.
Ms. Driver, known for her roles in movies like “Good Will Hunting,” was speaking at a London event focused on the #MeToo movement and organized by The New York Times and the How To Academy. Here are highlights of the interview.
She spoke at length about comments made by Matt Damon, a former boyfriend, who said that alleged sexual misdeeds by powerful men involved a “spectrum of behavior.” Speaking on ABC News in December, Mr. Damon had said there was “a difference between patting someone on the butt and rape or child molestation. Both of those behaviors need to be confronted and eradicated without question, but they shouldn’t be conflated.”
Ms. Driver said that Mr. Damon “represented every intelligent, nice white male who feels it is their job to comment on the way that women metabolize stuff.”
She added: “That somehow we should have a hierarchical system whereby touch on the arse is this, tits is this, you know, front bottom, back bottom, over the shirt, rape! That there would be some criteria.”
At the same time, she said men needed to be included in the conversation about sexual assault because “there’s no way to move forward unless we do this together.” Use the “model of truth and reconciliation,” she said, referring to courtlike commissions set up after the 1994 genocide in Rwanda or apartheid in South Africa, where the judicial bodies were tasked with revealing wrongdoing in hopes of healing wounds.
“Women get to be heard,” she said. “You get to be seen and heard and the accusers get to hear that and get to metabolize that and then there is due process and then there is healing.”
Last week, the deputy chief executive of Oxfam resigned in the wake of accusations that the British charity had covered up misconduct by its staff members after revelations that aid workers had hired prostitutes in crisis zones in Chad and Haiti.
Ms. Driver, who was affiliated with the organization for 20 years — her “longest relationship with anyone,” she said — announced last week that she was resigning from her role as a celebrity ambassador. “It broke my heart in so many ways,” she said, particularly because she had been primarily involved in programs that were helping prostitutes in countries like Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam to retrain and rebuild their lives. “It cut me to the very heart of what I had been involved with,” she said.
She added: “I needed to send a very clear message, not to the beautiful people that I’ve worked with on the ground for so many years who are amazing and industrious, but to the corporation that knew, corporate people who knew this was going on. Who hush-hushed it. Who were not transparent about it, either with me or the people that worked for them, and who didn’t do anything about it.”
Ms. Driver recounted her experience with Mr. Weinstein, the disgraced mogul who produced “Good Will Hunting,” in which she plays an erudite Harvard graduate.
“He didn’t want to cast me,” she said, because he told her and the casting director that she was not attractive enough to have sex with. “I got off lightly with him. I really did,” she added. “When we talk about sexual harassment, it’s not about sex, it’s about power.”
