Iraq’s New Leaders Seen as Technocrats, in a Break From Sectarian Politics
BEIRUT, Lebanon — For nearly five months, Iraqi politicians have wrangled over the shape of their new government.
The bloc led by Moktada al-Sadr, the former Shiite militia leader and longtime American enemy, won the most votes in the May election. He had rebranded himself as an “Iraq First” populist, vowing to fight corruption, opposing both American and Iranian intervention, and promising a new nonsectarian politics.
This week, the wrangling ended and Iraqis got new evidence that perhaps he meant what he said.
On Wednesday, an honor guard stood at attention as Iraq’s new head of state, President Barham Salih, entered the presidential palace in Baghdad’s Green Zone, a day after designating Adel Abdul Mahdi as prime minister.
Both leaders, chosen by consensus in Parliament on Tuesday, were widely seen as capable technocrats. Mr. Abdul Mahdi, who will take the top job, is a former vice president who is unaffiliated with any party and has a reputation for secularism. Mr. Salih, whose post is largely ceremonial, is a Kurdish politician who favors working with the central government in Baghdad.
The choices suggest that Iraq could finally be edging away from the sect- and party-based system that has driven its politics and fomented bloodshed since the American invasion in 2003.
“Iraq still faces the same problems of corruption, unemployment, poor services and the destruction of the areas taken from ISIS, but at last there are two individuals who are capable and well meaning in charge of the country,” said Emma Sky, a senior fellow at Yale University’s Jackson Institute for Global Affairs. “They are two competent, moderate, decent leaders, and they are very good friends.”
As to whether the new government would tilt further from Iran or the United States, which have been competing for influence in Iraq since the American-led invasion in 2003, analysts said to expect no big changes.
“Nothing extraordinary is going to change,” said Zaid Al-Ali, the author of “The Struggle for Iraq’s Future.” Mr. Abdul Mahdi, he said, was a political insider who was chosen not because he had a vision for Iraq, but because he did not pose a threat to any of the major parties.
“People who are interested in continuity will be very happy,” Mr. Ali said. “People who want reform or major change, they’ll be unhappy. This is a vote for continuity.”
The new leadership appeared to be acceptable to both the United States and Iran, analysts said.
“They are two people who are very astute, and I think they will do everything to try to find that balance,” Ms. Sky said. “They want both America and Iran to be friends of Iraq.”
Iraq faces myriad challenges: fixing the destruction wrought by the battle with the Islamic State; tamping down public anger over poor public services; tackling endemic corruption; and preventing a resurgence of the Islamic State. Addressing them would be a herculean task for any government, and the new Iraqi one has yet to be fully assembled.
Mr. Salih was elected in a landslide by the Iraqi Parliament on Tuesday. He designated Mr. Abdul Mahdi, the consensus candidate of the major blocs in Parliament, to form a government.
Mr. Abdul Madhi, 76, a trained economist who previously served as vice president, oil minister and finance minister, has 30 days to present his cabinet to Parliament for approval.
That, too, was a new twist. Previously, a cabinet and prime minister selected by the big parties behind the scenes have been presented to Parliament as a single package.
Some analysts said that change showed a new flexibility.
“We have seen a fragmentation of the political blocs and the inability of the same elite to play the same kinds of games and to make deals in back rooms and then basically tell the Parliament, ‘This is the new government,’” said Renad Mansour, a research fellow at Chatham House.
Two-thirds of those elected in May’s parliamentary election are new to the body, he said, and they seemed less bound by the traditional ways of doing things.
“It’s hard to be optimistic about Iraq and there are hard challenges ahead, but there is room for small change,” he said. “There is room for cautious optimism.”
Still, the new government could hardly be described as post-sectarian. According to an unofficial agreement in place since the toppling of Saddam Hussein in 2003, Iraq’s top three jobs are distributed by sect: the largely ceremonial president is a Kurd; the speaker of Parliament is a Sunni; the prime minister is a Shiite. That arrangement still holds.
But the selection of Mr. Abdul Mahdi and Mr. Salih suggest a more conciliatory approach.
For years, Mr. Abdul Mahdi served as a member of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a large Shiite party tied to Iran, but he became independent last year. He would be the first prime minister in 13 years not from Islamist Dawa party of former Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, whose Shiite majoritarian leadership alienated Iraq’s Kurds and Sunnis.
Mr. Salih, too, is seen as a uniter.
Mr. Salih, 58, has a doctorate in engineering from Britain and has previously served as Prime Minister of Iraq’s Kurdistan region and as planning minister in the Iraqi government.
Usually, Iraq’s two main Kurdish parties agree on a presidential candidate to send to Parliament in Baghdad to fill the post.
But this time, the vote was sharply contested, with the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan pushing for Mr. Salih while its rival, the Kurdistan Democratic Party, supported a confidant of Masoud Barzani, the former president of the Kurdistan region who pushed for a referendum on Kurdish independence last year. The referendum passed in a landslide but backfired spectacularly, escalating tensions with Baghdad and ultimately leaving the Kurdish region with less territory and autonomy than it had before.
The selection of president went to Parliament, where Mr. Salih won 220 out of 273 votes, largely because he is seen as more conciliatory on the issue of Kurdish independence.
“I promise to safeguard Iraq’s unity and safety,” he said as he was sworn in on Wednesday.
