Canada Letter  The End of a Ritual and a Daring Hostage Rescue
For many Canadians, catalog shopping was as much culture as commerce. A mail-order mix-up, for example, is at the heart of Roch Carrier’s “The Hockey Sweater,” a classic children’s book that became an equally celebrated animated film.
In small town Canada, particularly before the rise of online shopping and Walmart’s arrival 23 years ago, catalogs from Eaton’s and Simpsons-Sears offered big city selection. And the catalog outlet stores that sprung from them became hubs for hundreds of small communities.
On Friday, the tradition came to a symbolic end when a judge approved a decision to liquidate the assets of Sears Canada, successor to Simpsons-Sears and acquirer of Eaton’s. All of its remaining stores will close, leaving about 12,000 people jobless. The last Canadian department store mail-order catalogs will also vanish.
Catalogs weren’t just for people who lived in the country. Before World War II, Minnie Coutts, a widowed schoolteacher and my wife’s grandmother, spent her summers in Muskoka, in central Ontario. From her home in downtown Toronto she ordered a season’s worth of canned and preserved food from Eaton’s. It would be waiting on a dock when she arrived.
This week, Tom Vickers of Perth, Ontario, told me about how he eagerly looked forward to the arrival of Simpsons-Sears’ Wish Book, the annual Christmas catalog, when growing up in Westport, Ontario.
“We’d circle in marker the toys we wanted,” Mr. Vickers, 54, said. “It was the same way with my kids.”
Mr. Vickers eventually acquired a business connection with the catalog. In Perth, he owns one of the last remaining Sears catalog shops. His 4,000-square-foot store has samples of appliances and mattresses to test out before ordering (or for immediate purchase). At the back, there’s a window for picking up catalog or online orders and catching up on local news and gossip.
There were once hundreds of such stores in Canada. Just 49 remain. Mr. Vickers and the other owners are neither employees nor franchise holders. Instead they earn a living from relatively small commissions on the merchandise that moves through their shops.
Mr. Vickers and the other catalog shop owners will soon lose that income. What’s more, Mr. Vickers also holds the lease on the shop’s space in a strip mall. It has about 18 months remaining.
Unlike Sears in the United States, Sears Canada never quit the business of producing and sending out mail-order catalogs. But the turmoil of the past year has meant that the 2016 Wish Book has become the final catalog.
“Six months ago, I could see that it was getting to the end,” Mr. Vickers told me. “It’s really hard to see a company that was such an icon for so many years slip away.”
Did you long for the Christmas catalogs, too? Do you have any stories about buying by mail from Eaton’s and Sears? What did you buy? Please share the answers with us: nytcanada@nytimes.com.
Read: Sears Canada to Shut Down, Leaving 12,000 Out of Work 
Reports about Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein’s sexual misconduct have ended his career and opened discussion about the film industry and its treatment of women. Several prominent stars described their humiliating experiences to my colleagues Jodi Kantor and Rachel Abrams.
Read: Gwyneth Paltrow, Angelina Jolie and Others Say Weinstein Harassed Them
Jesse Green, The Times’s co-chief theater critic, described “Springsteen On Broadway” in his review as “overwhelming and uncategorizable” as well as a “greatest anti-hits concert.” But above all, Mr. Green declared, the show — created by and starring Bruce Springsteen — was something unique: “As portraits of artists go, there may never have been anything as real — and beautiful — on Broadway.”
Read: ‘Springsteen on Broadway’ Reveals the Artist, Real and Intense
Read: ‘Springsteen on Broadway’ to Hold Digital Ticket Lottery
Five years ago, Canadian Josh Boyle and Caitlan Coleman, his American wife, were kidnapped while backpacking in Afghanistan. This week Pakistani forces freed the couple, and their three children born in captivity, in a dramatic firefight.
As they joined me and a small number of other reporters on the front lawn of their imposing stone house in Smiths Falls, Ontario, Patrick and Linda Boyle, the parents of John, expressed joy and disbelief.
“The likelihood of a successful rescue was pretty much discounted in our minds,” Mr. Boyle, a tax court judge, said.
We’re following this story and will have more about the young family’s ordeal and history in the coming days.
Read: Gunshots, a Cry of ‘Kill the Hostages,’ Then Freedom for Canadian-American Family
Several Times reporters are examining the immense power and influence of tech companies, producing some provocative and compelling reads. David Streitfeld writes: “Their amount of concentrated authority resembles the divine right of kings, and is sparking a backlash that is still gathering force.” Farhad Manjoo, The Times’s tech columnist, reported that their power and wealth hasn’t always meant success in the entertainment business.
Read: Tech Giants, Once Seen as Saviors, Are Now Viewed as Threats
Read: The Frightful Five Want to Rule Entertainment. They Are Hitting Limits.
As I mentioned last week, I’ll be speaking Nov. 6 at Ryerson University about The Times and Canada in connection with “The Faraway Nearby,” an exhibition of photos about Canada and Canadians from the The Times’s archives. It’s an invitation-only event. But we have an invitation for two Canada Letter readers, which we are giving away through this draw.
The BBC radio program and podcast “In Our Time” couldn’t be simpler: Each week, three academics discuss something related to their studies with Melvyn Bragg, a broadcaster, author and member of the House of Lords. The topics are wide ranging and have included Plato’s Symposium, the eye (not for squeamish listeners), and “ Four Quartets,” T. S. Eliot’s last work. Mr. Bragg is masterly at extracting clear and interesting explanations of the most complex topics. My tip: Don’t be fussy. I find the best episodes often involve topics that seem of no interest to me.
—With Prime Minister Justin Trudeau seated at his side, President Trump moved closer to ending the North American Free Trade Agreement
—Something was missing from Canada’s new Holocaust memorial.
