Villager and Israeli Police Officer Die in Clash at Bedouin Hamlet
JERUSALEM — The sun had not yet risen over the Bedouin hamlet early Wednesday as hundreds of Israeli police officers gathered at its edges. They had come to help demolish part of the village, but two people were dead before the forces had destroyed any houses.
The police fatally shot a resident they said was about to ram them with his car. The vehicle struck one police officer, killing him.
The police version of the events was immediately disputed by the motorist’s relatives in the village in southern Israel’s Negev, as well as human rights activists who had come to support the villagers. They insisted that he had plowed into the officers only after he was shot and lost control of the car.
The residents’ anger was a reflection of a much deeper acrimony between the Bedouins and the Israeli authorities in a land dispute that in some ways parallels the battles over unauthorized Jewish settlement construction in occupied territory.
With the Bedouins, however, the contested territory is within Israel’s original boundaries set in the 1948 war; Bedouins are also among Israel’s more than 1.7 million Arab citizens, and the dispute over Negev lands claimed by them is as old as the state of Israel.
The ramshackle village, Umm al-Hiran, was scheduled for demolition after its residents lost a long legal battle against the government. Adding to the residents’ sense of affront, it is to be razed to make way for the construction of a new community, Hiran, planned mainly for observant Jewish inhabitants.
The dispute feeds into the broader frustrations of Israel’s Arab minority, which makes up about a fifth of the population of more than 8.5 million and has long complained of institutional discrimination. The Bedouin population of the Negev, which numbers about 200,000 people, is often counted as Israel’s fastest growing and poorest group.
The police released footage from a helicopter of what they described as the ramming attack that killed the officer, Advanced Staff Sgt. Erez Levi, 34. The images showed the vehicle first moving slowly, then accelerating and ramming into a group of people. Footage seen from a different angle on Israeli television appeared to show an officer opening fire before it picked up speed.
Ayman Odeh, a leading Arab member of the Israeli Parliament, was wounded in the ensuing clashes. He said he had been struck in the head and the back by sponge-tipped bullets fired by the police. The authorities suggested that he may have been injured by stones thrown by rioters.
The police said in a statement that the fatally shot car driver, Yakub Musa Abu al-Qian, belonged to the southern branch of the Islamic Movement in Israel, a group that provides social services to Arab communities and that promotes its conservative interpretation of Islam. The southern branch is generally considered more moderate than the northern branch, and neither is usually associated with violent attacks.
Relatives of Mr. Qian, a math teacher about 50 years old, denied that he was an extremist.
Adalah, a group that campaigns for Arab-minority rights in Israel and that has provided legal representation for the residents of Umm al-Hiran over the past 13 years, said that the families of the Abu al-Qian tribe had been expelled from their lands with the establishment of the state in 1948 and, during the 1950s, had been ordered to move to Umm al-Hiran. The government never legally recognized the village and demanded that the people relocate to a nearby government-planned Bedouin town, called Houra.
Yair Maayan, of Israel’s official Bedouin Development and Settlement Authority, said the tribe had been allowed to settle in the 1950s about two miles north of the current site of the village. In 1980, Mr. Maayan told reporters, one of the sons of the chief “decided he wanted to have his own village, moved to the area of Umm al-Hiran and built an illegal house on land owned by the government.”
The village has since grown, with clusters of houses, tin shacks and animal pens sprawling over the hills.
The courts finally decided in the government’s favor in May 2015. Since then, the authorities have been negotiating with the residents. So far, Mr. Maayan said, about 40 families have accepted a compensation deal, including alternative land and money, and moved to Houra over the years. About 400 people remained in the village.
Negotiations with another few families collapsed shortly before midnight on Tuesday. Israel’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement that the families had come to sign on a voluntary evacuation-for-compensation agreement but “instead of signing the agreement, presented more and more demands until the negotiations blew up.”
The police and bulldozers arrived hours later.
Salim Abu al-Qian, 58, a village leader, said about 10 structures out of several dozen were destroyed on Wednesday. Asked about the negotiations with the government, he said, “They are liars. They promise things then go back on them.” He added, “It’s a criminal government. It has no limits.”
Speaking by telephone during, and again after the demolitions, Salim rejected the police account of the car ramming. He said that he had spoken by phone with the driver — a cousin who was married to Salim’s sister — five minutes before he was killed.
“I told him they were coming to destroy houses,” Salim said. “He said he did not want any violence. I told him to come to our place.” He said that the police had come “with hatred in their hearts.”
Mr. Odeh, the legislator, said he had been in the village until late Tuesday and had taken part in negotiations between the residents and the authorities.
“Let me be clear: It was possible to prevent the spilling of blood,” he said in a statement. But Mr. Odeh said that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had “decided himself to cruelly destroy a whole village.”
The Israeli government recently pledged to step up law enforcement against unauthorized Arab construction to placate right-wing Israelis who are protesting court-ordered government plans to destroy Amona, an illegally built Jewish outpost in the occupied West Bank.
“The state of Israel is, above all, a nation of law in which there will be equal enforcement,” Mr. Netanyahu said on Wednesday. Of the suspected car ramming, he said, “Not only will this incident not deter us, it will strengthen us. It will strengthen our determination to enforce the law everywhere.”
