At Greece’s Refugee Camps, Trying to Recreate the Everyday
A year after the European Union closed its borders to stem a crush of asylum seekers, tens of thousands still languish in camps inside Greece. For them, a life in limbo has taken on an air of permanence. They outfit unfamiliar surroundings with the trappings of home, seeking a semblance of normalcy.
I toured several of these camps recently. At one, Elliniko, which is at a crumbling abandoned airport outside Athens, a corner had been turned into a makeshift mosque, where an Afghan refugee prepared to pray, oblivious to the chatter of hundreds around him.
At another, Skaramagas, near the port of Piraeus, home-cooked meals brought a flash of joy to dreary days. The Ibrahim and Ali families, who arrived on a dinghy last summer, invited me and some of their friends for barbecue chicken and roasted vegetables. A neighbor who joined, Abdulrahman Alo, the man in the rear of the photograph below, lost both legs in a bomb attack in Syria.
But a normal life is hard to come by. The camps have their own class structure. Those with the least hope of staying in Europe are housed in rougher camps, like one in Oinofyta, an industrial area in central Greece that is home to about 550 Afghans.
There, I met Horta, an Afghan girl, who was painting her nails outside the tiny room in an abandoned warehouse where she and her family have lived since last year.
Over a third of refugees in Greece are children, and despite covering the crisis since it started, I was struck by how many babies were still being born in the camps. One Afghan mother shyly held up her newborn, and gestured that another was on the way. Like many residents, she had decorated the walls of her room to settle in for the long haul.
In Skaramagas, one Syrian woman boasted that she was about to give birth to her seventh child — this one in Greece. She joined her friend, Naram Sebah, who was smoking a hookah on the Piraeus dock with friends as sea gulls soared overhead. Everyone laughed and took selfies, showing off their headdresses and rhinestone-stitched sweatshirts.
Yet laughter and community can only do so much to alleviate an abiding sense of boredom and uncertainty, and to make more bearable what remain, at best, rudimentary living conditions. Elliniko was a gritty tent favela beset by fighting and drug dealing. On the Greek islands, where refugees continue to arrive from Turkey, the camps are sordid and dangerously overcrowded. In Oinofyta, heat had only been installed in December. After an outbreak of scabies, residents there piled up wool blankets to be burned.
People try to amuse themselves and pass the time. Humanitarian organizations had set up activities, including a barbershop and a sewing room where refugees made stylish purses. Yet “everyone here feels depressed,” Maryam Akbary, 26, an Afghan engineering student who was trying to join her family in Germany, confided to me.
Nearby in Ritsona, another Syrian refugee camp was set among pine trees filled with singing birds. When I arrived, scores of children laughed and ate with their families at a birthday party, while a refugee dressed as a clown danced with a megaphone.
Later, the children flew kites joyfully across a field, where everyone here had once lived in sun-beaten, dusty tents until container shelters arrived.
Half the 62,000 asylum seekers in Greece are Syrians, and the camps holding them, like Skaramagas, are in many ways better than those where Afghan refugees live. Mini-marketplaces have sprung up. Enterprising refugees installed stands that sold falafel, fruits and vegetables, or snacks, phone cards and soft drinks. One man had even acquired three washing machines and was running a brisk laundromat business.
Teenagers played video games late into the night in containers equipped by the government and aid organizations with computers and Wi-Fi.
At Skaramagas, around 3,200 refugees who used to live outdoors in flimsy tents now reside in container shelters with toilets, water and televisions. Many are moving on to new countries in Europe, leaving their containers behind.
For others, hope is far slimmer. At Elliniko, Samim Haidari, a brainy 20-year-old Afghan refugee, had taught himself to speak English almost fluently using about 20 apps on his smartphone, hoping it would help him win asylum.
“I’ve been here for a year and two days, and I still have no idea what’s going to happen,” he said. “I have to make the best of it. There’s no other choice.”
