Brother of Qandeel Baloch, Pakistani Internet Star, Gets Life Term for Her Murder
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — A brother of a Pakistani internet sensation was sentenced on Friday to life in prison for her murder, after a three-year trial in a case that returned the spotlight to a rampant practice of “honor killings.”
The authorities said the brother, Waseem Ahmed Azeem, confessed in 2016 that he had killed his sister Fauzia Azeem, who achieved fame in conservative Pakistan by posting provocative views and images, including seminude pictures, on Facebook and Twitter under the name Qandeel Baloch.
In a case like this in Pakistan, however, a confession is by no means a guarantee of a conviction.
While many of Ms. Baloch’s admirers considered her a feminist hero, Mr. Azeem believed that his sister had sullied the family’s honor by posting what he called “shameful pictures.” He drugged and strangled her as she slept in her parents’ home in Muzaffarabad, a town on the outskirts of Multan in Punjab Province, on July 15, 2016, and was arrested within days.
The parents took his side, submitting a written statement during the trial proceedings saying that they had absolved him and asking the court to do the same. The assailants in many such “honor killings” in Pakistan are permitted to go free because the victim’s family forgives the killer.
The judge in this case denied the request. Five other suspects, including a well-known cleric accused of inciting the killing, were acquitted for lack of evidence. Mr. Azeem’s lawyer said he would challenge the verdict in a higher court.
The killing ignited an outcry among Ms. Baloch’s fans and human rights groups. The conviction of Mr. Azeem, said Sanam Maher, a Karachi-based journalist who has written a book about Ms. Baloch, “makes a strong statement and brings closure to some of Qandeel’s supporters.”
“But it isn’t the last word in this case,” Ms. Maher said. “Honor killings are complicated; they have a life beyond the verdict, and they are a symptom of a flawed society that will brutally punish men and women who wish to live outside the confines of the social code.”
Rights activists and supporters of Ms. Baloch had especially awaited the court’s decision on the cleric, Mufti Abdul Qavi. Shortly before the murder, Ms. Baloch had posted pictures and videos of herself with Mr. Qavi. In the videos, Ms. Baloch wore the cleric’s hat while he stared into the camera.
Some people, including Ms. Baloch’s mother, initially accused the cleric of inciting the killing. Mr. Qavi denied the allegations.
After he was acquitted, his supporters showered rose petals on him.
Ms. Maher, the journalist who has written about the victim, said that people would soon forget the killer, but that the memory of Ms. Baloch would live on.
This year, as thousands of women staged rallies countrywide on International Women’s Day against patriarchy, abuse and honor killings, many held pictures of Ms. Baloch, Ms. Maher said.
“Her legacy is to continue to encourage us to think that if she could speak out, we should all at least try to do the same ourselves,” she said.
