A Man or a ‘Yellow Object’? Hong Kong Police Dispute Assault Allegations
HONG KONG — Distrust between pro-democracy protesters and the Hong Kong police deepened on Tuesday after a senior police official suggested that a man in a yellow shirt, whom officers are accused of abusing in video captured last weekend, was in fact a “yellow object.”
At least two bystanders in Yuen Long, a neighborhood that has been the site of some of Hong Kong’s worst violence during its monthslong protest movement, filmed what was widely interpreted to be police officers kicking the man as he lay on the ground on Saturday. 
But at a news conference on Monday, Vasco Williams, the police official, insisted that the officers had done nothing wrong and that videos appearing to show otherwise were doctored. 
Mr. Williams’s description of the man as a “yellow object” — suggesting that officers in the sometimes-blurry videos could have been surrounding a bag or a vest, not a human — roiled protesters and opposition lawmakers who considered it obfuscation straight out of China’s playbook. 
“It sums up the insensitive, callous nature of the Hong Kong police force,” said Claudia Mo, a pro-democracy legislator who has supported the protests. “It’s a communist tactic: You dehumanize, you demonize, you reduce your enemies to nothing and then you attack.”
The flare-up illustrated how precipitously views of the Hong Kong police force — once known as “Asia’s finest” — have deteriorated as officers have cracked down on increasingly violent protests. 
Witness videos reviewed by The New York Times indicate the “yellow object” was in fact a man. But it is less clear whether the officers kicked the man — the scene around them was chaotic, and other officers aimed their flashlights at cameras to try to obscure the view. 
Roy Chan, a preacher at the Good Neighbor North District Church, said the man seen in the video was a member of a campaign known as “Protect Our Kids” that has tried to act as a peacekeeper during the often violent protests. He said the man had bleeding gums and was experiencing dizziness from the encounter. The man was charged with assaulting a police officer, Mr. Chan said.
“According to the footage and the report from our members, we have strong reasons to believe that these injuries are caused by police abuses of power,” he said in a statement that did not identify the man. “We are profoundly concerned and angered by the situation.”
Mr. Williams, an acting senior superintendent, defended the police officers by saying that the videos were not clear enough to determine what had happened.
“You mentioned a video which shows what appears to be an officer kicking a yellow object on the ground,” he said to a reporter. “Now, we don’t know what that object is, but there are other videos that are more clear that show the entire incident and there’s no malpractice by the police whatsoever in the clear video.”
It was not known which video he was referring to. The police did not immediately respond to a request for a link to the video. 
Later in the news conference, Mr. Williams asserted that bystanders had “doctored the video to show police kicking people,” without offering evidence. 
He received support on Tuesday from Carrie Lam, the territory’s beleaguered chief executive, who declined to take a stance on the video. 
“It would be very difficult for me as a chief executive to offer my own opinion on individual video footage or shots to determine what is right, what is wrong, what is true, what is fake, because there has been so far always different versions to the same incident,” she said at a news conference. 
The various video clips circulating on social media and messaging apps popular with protesters show several dozen officers in an alley, surrounding the man in yellow. At least one video showed a man wearing similar clothing leaned up against a wall with his arms behind his back. 
While the video quality leaves it unclear whether the officers kicked the man, protesters saw such abuse as consistent with the recent conduct of officers, who have often referred to protesters as “cockroaches” and have been criticized by several international watchdogs. 
Agnes Chow, an activist who was arrested in August, said the incident showed that the government “wouldn’t criticize, condemn or investigate the police force that has gone out of control.”
“This shows the police’s complete lack of respect for protesters, the basic respect not just for protesters but also for humans,” she said. 
Ken Tsang, an activist who was beaten up by seven officers during the 2014 Umbrella Movement and later jailed for resisting arrest and assaulting the police after he splashed a liquid at them, said he was “disappointed and angered by the police’s nonsense.”
“Police have said, knowing there are cameras everywhere, would they be so stupid as to beat up protesters in front of the cameras?” he said. “They are doing exactly that, even lying.”
Hong Kong is preparing for what’s expected to be a tense week. Demonstrations are expected on Friday, the fifth anniversary of the end of the Umbrella Movement, and on Oct. 1, China’s National Day holiday, which this year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China under the Communist Party. 
On Tuesday, Roy Kwong, a pro-democracy lawmaker, was ambushed by three masked men as he walked toward his car near a wetlands park in the Tin Shui Wai area on Tuesday morning, according to lawmakers who spoke to Mr. Kwong after the attack. They said the three men kicked and punched him, injuring his cervical vertebrae. 
Tiffany May contributed reporting.
