When a government official announced on Australian national television on Wednesday that 61.6 percent of participants in a nonbinding nationwide survey had said “yes” to same-sex marriage, thousands of people gathered in public to celebrate. They hugged, cried and danced to “Love Is in the Air.” Some rushed to post Instagram photos of themselves holding a Golden Gaytime, a nostalgic Australian ice-cream brand.
While the survey result doesn’t guarantee that same-sex marriage will be enshrined into law, the overwhelming support for the “yes” camp puts enormous pressure on Parliament to legalize it before the end of the year.
Tacey Rychter, an Australian reporter and editor for The Times based in Sydney, met with the Op-Ed columnist Frank Bruni on a recent trip to New York to discuss L.G.B.T. rights and same-sex marriage in the United States and Australia.
The conversation has been lightly edited.
Tacey Rychter: What was it like for you to be covering same-sex marriage in the United States? How did the debate play out in the lead up to it becoming federal law in 2015?
Frank Bruni: Outside of very limited circles there wasn’t that much of a conversation about same-sex marriage or that much of a political movement advocating it. Until the late 2000s, it just wasn’t where L.G.B.T. political activists had their energy invested.
In 1996 Bill Clinton signed into law the Defense of Marriage Act. That is an indication of just how little favor there was for same-sex marriage only 21 years ago. After that, I think most people in the L.G.B.T. community assumed gay marriage was a lost cause.
And then through the 2000s there were states that legalized gay marriage in various ways. Iowa, oddly, was one of the first.
Then, right around 2011, when New York legalized gay marriage, this really took off. And one of the reasons it did — and one of the real political lessons of it — was that the L.G.B.T. community really developed the language that they ended up using to argue for this.
They did this by talking about gay marriage in terms of fundamentally conservative values: fidelity, family planning, and all that sort of stuff. This reframed the whole gay crusade. It ended up being a powerful engine for gay rights because for a long time when you said to Americans “gay rights,” they flashed on the gay pride parade, on men in leather and on “dykes on bikes.” They flashed on people who wanted validation for what those other Americans saw as a transgressive lifestyle.
The great thing about marriage equality and same-sex marriage is it was saying, “let us enter into this very conservative arrangement, please let us emulate you. More of our values are in common with yours than in conflict.”
It took a while for L.G.B.T. people to realize what a winning argument gay marriage was.
What does that tipping point reveal about America? And how can we learn something about Australia from this?
It reveals two things about America. And I think these things were boldly underscored by the last election.
First, too much change, too quickly, frightens people — and I don’t think this is true just of Americans. It certainly frightens Americans — the sense that the fundamental paradigm of the country as they know it is being challenged or changed scares them. And so for gay and lesbian people to reframe themselves from the other to the familiar was a huge thing.
Second, and this is true in the United States and in Australia, it used to be the case that the vast majority of gay and lesbian people were in the closet, so people were thinking about gay rights as an abstraction. Gay rights were not about how much you loved and respected your sister, your son, your uncle, your cousin, your best friend from college.
Now, pretty much everywhere — I know this to be true in Australia without knowing much about the country — it’s a generational matter. If you are under the age of 50 or 60, or even if you’re older, you don’t live in a world in which gay or lesbian people are an abstraction. So when you vote in a way that seems dismissive or censorious of them, or when you vote in a way that seems to deny them a right, you process that vote now as something you are doing to your beloved friend, to your beloved son. That’s changed everything and that’s why I think 50 years from now this will all seem quaint.
The welfare of children has been a major focus on both sides of the debate in Australia. Was it the same in the United States?
I don’t think you will find a country in this world where the opponents of same-sex marriage won’t start talking about kids. If you’re against gay marriage, and you are trying to mount a campaign against it, one of the most effective things you can do is to start talking about “what does this mean for kids?” And “are they going to be inculcating homosexual children? Are they going to be fit parents?”
Always in the periphery of that whole thing are the ridiculous old stereotypes of gay men as sexual predators. It’s interesting that that still gets brought up during week five or six of the sexual harassment conversation, and it becomes increasingly hard to make a case that gay men are uniquely predatory. It was never true.
What surprises you about the way the same-sex marriage debate has played out in Australia — especially considering that Australia is one of the last holdouts among English-speaking democracies to legalize it?
There are a couple of things that surprised me about it. We think of Australia as a sort of frontier country. It’s one of those places like the U.S., and in a way more than the U.S., where people have gone to remake themselves, to invent themselves. And you would think that would go hand-in-hand with a celebration of personal freedom. But Australia is also a place with toxic masculinity, and Australia is probably a place that has a more potent strain of toxic masculinity than America. That’s not something that works in favor of getting people to rally around same-sex marriage.
The thing that surprises me is I have never thought of Australia as a particularly religious nation, and usually the organized resistance to this comes mostly from religion. But one of the things we’ve learned in the last 10 years as various countries have come to advance gay rights — and I’ve written about this — is that half of the countries in the globe that have legalized same-sex marriage have Catholic majorities or significant Catholic pluralities.
I know that nearly 24 percent of Australians are Catholic. In these other countries, Catholics represent anywhere from 35 to 80 percent: Portugal, Spain, Brazil. So we’re learning that the interplay between religion and this issue depends enormously on which religion we’re talking about. And oddly, given the position in Rome, Catholic countries have been some of the most hospitable. Like Ireland — I think in most circumstances abortion remains illegal there. It’s a real outlier. And that’s partly due to its Catholicism. Ireland put this to a popular referendum, kind of like Australia, but not by mail. Sixty-two percent of people in Ireland passed this.
So maybe Australia doesn’t have enough Catholics. You have almost the same percentage of Catholics in Australia as we do in the United States. But of course we’ll never know — if this had been decided in the U.S. by popular referendum nationwide I don’t know that we’d have same-sex marriage.
What happened after same-sex marriage was legalized in the United States? Do you get the sense that L.G.B.T. people feel more accepted in their family and social groups?
Very much so. I think as long as people couldn’t use that language and didn’t have that legal option, there was this reality that said to them constantly: “You don’t get the same things. You are lesser.” I mean this as a functional matter and as a symbolic matter. This absolutely is a measure of equality. And that’s why it freaks people out. There are still many people in this country, as in Australia, who believe gay relationships are at best unseemly and at worst an abomination. Those people are not going away. There are generational forces. But when I say 50 years from now this will seem quaint, it will.
