RIO DE JANEIRO — Representative Jair Bolsonaro, the front-runner in Brazil’s presidential election, was hospitalized in intensive care on Thursday night after being stabbed during a campaign event earlier in the day, according to officials.
Mr. Bolsonaro, a far-right politician, has been a divisive figure in Brazil, where he is adored by some for his tough talk and reviled by others for his diatribes against women, gays and blacks.
Mr. Bolsonaro was being carried by supporters through a throng of people in Juiz de Fora, a city in Minas Gerais State, in southeastern Brazil, when a person lunged toward him and jabbed a knife into his abdomen, according to a video of the attack shared on social media.
One of the candidate’s sons, Flavio Bolsonaro, said the knife pierced Mr. Bolsonaro’s liver, a lung and his intestinal tract. “He lost a lot of blood,” he said on Twitter.
Mr. Bolsonaro was conscious and spending the night in the intensive care unit after undergoing surgery, Dr. Luiz Henrique Borsato of the Santa Casa Hospital in Juiz de Fora said at a late-night news conference. Doctors said Mr. Bolsonaro would be hospitalized for at least a week.
Mr. Bolsonaro was in shock from abdominal bleeding when he arrived at the hospital, Dr. Borsato said. “The injuries that were threatening his life were treated during the surgery,” he said.
Mr. Bolsonaro’s campaign and police officials in Minas Gerais identified the assailant as Adélio Bispo de Oliveira. He was taken into custody by supporters of the candidate. They then turned him over to the federal police officers who provide security for Mr. Bolsonaro.
Police officers at the scene reported that the assailant said he was carrying out “an order from God,” Luis Boundens, the president of the federation of federal police officers, told Piauí Magazine’s website. That, he added, led investigators to question the assailant’s mental state.
Politicians across the ideological spectrum were unanimous in condemning the attack, the latest twist in a polarizing presidential contest.
“It is intolerable that, living in a democratic state of law, it’s not possible to have an orderly campaign,” President Michel Temer said in a televised address.
The stabbing was the latest act of political violence in Brazil this year. Rio de Janeiro councilwoman Marielle Franco was killed on March 14 after assailants opened fire on her car. Days later, campaign buses hired by former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva — the onetime front-runner in the race, whose corruption conviction made him ineligible to run — were shot at in southern Brazil.
“The act of violence against candidate Jair Bolsonaro is inadmissible and represents a double assault: against his physical integrity and against democracy,” former Senator Marina Silva, one of Mr. Bolsonaro’s top rivals, wrote on Twitter. 
Another presidential hopeful, Geraldo Alckmin, a former governor of São Paulo, said he hoped Mr. Bolsonaro’s assailant would be duly punished.
“Politics is done through dialogue and persuasion, never through hate,” he wrote on Twitter. “Any act of violence is deplorable.”
Mr. Bolsonaro, 63, has an ample lead in the most splintered presidential contest in generations. A new poll by Ibope issued this week puts him ahead of the pack with 22 percent of voter support. His closest rivals are tied with 12 percent. The vote will be held next month.
Mr. Bolsonaro has earned a fiercely loyal following among a segment of Brazilians who find his unfiltered style refreshing. He has promised to restore order to a country suffering from an increase of violence by making it easier for civilians to bear arms and for the police to kill criminals.
But his discriminatory verbal attacks have led to his being charged by the attorney general this year with inciting hatred against blacks, women, gays and indigenous people.
Mauricio Araujo, a security guard at a day care center in São Paulo, said he suspected the assault represented an effort to knock Mr. Bolsonaro out of the race.
“Everybody in this election is corrupt except for Bolsonaro,” he said. “The old party machine is going to try to get him out of the way.”
Mauricio Santoro, a political scientist at the State University of Rio de Janeiro said he was heartened by the unanimous condemnation of the attack, calling it a “rare moment of civility in this campaign.” But he predicted it may make the race even more bitter and boost Mr. Bolsonaro’s appeal among his followers.
“The impact for his supporters will be immense,” Mr. Santoro said. “It will reinforce the sense that he is a special leader, that he can change the country, that he is fighting against an authoritarian left.”
Eduardo Bolsonaro, another son of Mr. Bolsonaro, and a fellow congressman, asked for prayers as he invoked his father’s military past.
“A soldier who goes to war fearful of dying is a coward,” Eduardo Bolsonaro said in a message on Twitter.
