The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• Yassmin Abdel-Magied talks betrayal, in a week of racially charged headlines.
• Leaks allege civilian killings by Australian troops in Afghanistan.
• A can of beer flies from Melbourne to Perth.
The activist and former TV host Yassmin Abdel-Magied, who has called herself “the most publicly hated Muslim in Australia,” christened her new move to London by giving an interview to BuzzFeed UK News. She said that she felt “a little bit betrayed by Australia.”
“In a country like Australia, people are very happy to accept you as long as you toe the line, and I had toed the line for 10 years in the public eye,” said Ms. Abdel-Magied, who was subjected to waves of vitriol after defending Islam on the television program “Q&A” and suggesting that Australia’s offshore detainees be remembered on Anzac Day.
She said she considered Australia her home and Australians her people. “And to, sort of, fight for your right to exist in your home country — it’s exhausting. Where do you go that’s safe, if not your home?”
On Wednesday, an Australian commentator seemed to go out of her way to prove Ms. Abdel-Magied’s point. On a 2BG radio segment called “Smithy’s Deplorables,” Prue Macsween, a former journalist, told the host Chris Smith that “if I had seen her, I’d be tempted to run her over.” Ms. Macsween went on to call Ms. Abdel-Magied a “flea” who “slinked away from this country in disgrace.”
Is the news media in Australia biased?
Ms. Abdel-Magied’s comments (and Ms. Macsween’s) come after several recent instances of what critics called racism in the mainstream news media.
• In a segment for the Sky News Australia show “Outsiders,” the host Rowan Dean told Tim Soutphommasane, the race discrimination commissioner on the Australian Human Rights Commission, that his calls for more diversity in the news media were an attack on Anglo-Celtics. “Tim, if you don’t like it,” he told the French-born commissioner, who is of Laotian descent, “join Yassmin [Abdel-Magied], hop on a plane and go back to Laos.”
• Fairfax Media’s The Age published an article about Melbourne’s bicycle-sharing program, oBike, with the headline, “Are oBikes Melbourne’s new yellow peril?” “Yellow peril” is an archaic, racist term that characterizes East Asian immigrants as a threat. The Age changed the headline and deleted a tweet that had used it.
• On Saturday, the Australian arm of the conservative magazine The Spectator published a piece that said some of the instigators of apartheid in South Africa “may have had a point.” It also referred to “the Islamist scourge.”
• And Seven News Australia jumped on word of Ms. Abdel-Magied’s departure with a Facebook poll that asked its audience if she should go or “stay and face her critics.” After critics called it “extreme bullying,” Seven News pulled the post and apologized. We covered the poll and the response to it in our Breakdown last week.
Given that this is a snapshot from just the past week or so, perhaps it’s not hard to imagine why she’d feel betrayed.
[2:40 p.m.]
Hundreds of pages of leaked military documents are raising uncomfortable questions about Australia’s elite special forces unit in Afghanistan. The Australian Broadcasting Corporation revealed this week that the secret documents included details of troops killing unarmed men and children.
The report also said that the Australian special forces discussed planting weapons on dead Afghans to create the illusion that those killed were armed combatants. Most of the documents are reports on events from 2009 to 2013.
The inspector general of the Australian Defense Force is conducting an inquiry, and the Australian Federal Police told the ABC that they were also considering an investigation.
Australian forces aren’t the first to be accused in civilian deaths. But the troubling elements outlined in the report, like a “body count” culture that celebrates racking up numbers of killed enemies, could point to more systemic issues.
We asked several military experts for insight, and they suggested a few changes.
1. Minimize inquiries.
Dr. Rodger Shanahan was previously deployed to Afghanistan as a military officer and was tasked with conducting investigations into accusations of civilian casualties. Today he’s a research fellow at the Lowy Institute, and he argues that aggressive inquiries into incidents involving civilian casualties may exacerbate a culture of violence and cover-ups.
“Sometimes, there was an overreaction to what didn’t need an external inquiry to be looked into,” he said, referring to his experience in war. “It was something that should have been handled in theater.”
Aside from fostering protectionism and cover-ups, he said, emphasis on civilian deaths may unwittingly give the enemy a tool.
“Your opposition also know that accusations of civilian casualties are a lethal weapon in the social media space,” Mr. Shanahan said.
Finally there are the logistical challenges of an investigation, he said. “There’s a lag time in the time between an incident happens and the inquiry happening, and the war goes on,” Mr. Shanahan said.
“There’s no way you could guarantee that nobody has spoken to each other,” he said, warning that either the accusers or the accused could potentially fabricate false narratives.
2. Follow the broader inquiry through.
The inspector general’s investigation will prove invaluable because it is looking beyond an individual case, said Bob Lowry, who served in the Australian Army for 30 years and is president of the Australian Institute of International Affairs in Canberra.
“When it’s happened twice, three, four times, you’ve then got a systemic problem,” he said. “Was it someone from above demanding measures be taken? Was it something that grew from below? The thing to do is to talk to all the people involved, and find out what it is, where it came from, and what caused it to be in the first place.”
“Once you understand what’s happened,” he added, “then you can decide what measures to take.”
3. Re-emphasize the objective.
One document in the leak referred to a “warrior culture” as a potentially systemic issue. Mr. Lowry said that it was important to regularly emphasize that the mission’s goal is the primary focus.
“You’ve got to keep a broader context and say, ‘Look, we’re not interested in how many people you’ve killed,’” he said. “‘What we’re interested in is whether or not we’re achieving the objective of the operation that we set out to.’ You might be able to achieve that without killing anybody.”
[7:04 a.m.]
It’s a quintessentially Australian story, equal parts beer and cheek.
A man identified only as “Dean” claims to have checked in a single can of beer on a Qantas flight from Melbourne to Perth this past Saturday.
“Honestly, the thought of a single can of export making its way down the baggage carousel was too good to pass up so I thought I’d give it a whirl,” the man told the millennial media empire Unilad.
His caper spread far and wide, being picked up by the likes of Time, Mashable and The New York Post.
Naturally, here at The New York Times’s Australia Bureau, we checked in with Qantas for comment. A spokesman, sounding less than cheerful, confirmed the story.
“It did happen,” he said. “Someone’s checked something in. To be honest, we don’t want to encourage people to do this.”
And how does that align with the check-in policy of Australia’s national airline?
“This guy’s done it, and he’s won the internet for the day. We’re quite happy to move on,” the spokesman said.
[9:32 a.m.]
