The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• An elite Australian university hires a sexual assault counselor after a wave of criticism.
• Jeff Horn is still the welterweight champion after a new review.
• Policies for Indigenous Australians in New South Wales may warrant more scrutiny, a report suggests.
Australian National University, after more than a year of withering criticism over its handling of sexual assault and harassment on campus, will soon have a full-time on-campus counselor specializing in the issue.
Officials at the university said the announcement on Tuesday was its latest initiative to end sexual violence and harassment on campus, and the move was praised by advocates.
“This is a further step forward for A.N.U., and I have yet to see another university in the country that has been so proactive,” said Chrystina Stanford, chief executive of the Canberra Rape Crisis Center.
 Australian universities have been inconsistent in their response to sexual assault and harassment on campus.
We reported last month that over the past year Australia has been grappling with on-campus assaults and reprisals against victims. Some universities have been slow to discipline perpetrators; some provide access to counselors, though not necessarily with specialized training in sexual assault; and education around the issue can vary from campus to campus.
A January report by the advocacy group End Rape on Campus Australia found that universities had frequently failed to support victims of sexual assault and harassment. And while the problem is global, each new scandal in Australia has prompted more women to speak out.
In the United States, by contrast, because of Title IX — a 1972 federal law mandating equal access to higher education — every American educational institution receiving federal funding is required to have a Title IX coordinator, whom victims can contact to report sex discrimination, sexual harassment or violence.
In Australia, many students say that requests for similar policies have been thwarted or delayed.
“This is an exciting new initiative and reaffirms the university’s strong commitment to do everything we can to stop all forms of sexual assault and harassment,” said Brian Schmidt, the vice chancellor of Australian National University.
[10:31 a.m. A.E.S.T.]
Jeff Horn ignited global outrage when he beat Manny Pacquiao last week in Brisbane.
Now, oops, he did it again.
An independent review of the judges’ scorecards by five independent judges from the World Boxing Organization has confirmed the original decision: Mr. Horn is still the winner of the welterweight title. “Pacquiao won five rounds while Horn won seven rounds,” the review found.
The two men may soon fight again, with a possible rematch in November in Brisbane. Mr. Horn’s trainer Glenn Ruston has warned the result will be the same “because Jeff will only get stronger.”
[2:02 p.m. A.E.S.T.]
New South Wales’s policies regarding Indigenous Australians may warrant a closer look, according to new report issued by the state’s Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research. While the imprisonment rate of Indigenous Australians has increased significantly over 10 years, the report says that is not necessarily because crime has increased, but because of changes in the policing of certain offenses.
The report cited studies that found that from 1993 to 2016, the imprisonment rate of Indigenous Australians in the country rose 63 percent.
What else did this report find?
One of the main factors contributing to the rising imprisonment rate was an increase in the proportion of offenders receiving a prison sentence for stalking and intimidation.
According to the Crimes (Personal and Domestic Violence) Act 2007, stalking or intimidation with intent to cause fear or harm carries a maximum penalty of five years’ imprisonment, and people can be convicted even if there is no proof “that the person alleged to have been stalked or intimidated actually feared physical or mental harm.”
Jane Wangmann, a senior lecturer at the University of Technology Sydney, said that intimidation covered a much broader type of behavior than stalking.
“It captures a wide range of behaviors” that are deemed to amount to harassment, she said. “You’ve got the possibility of intimidating someone by multiple text messages or emailing, things left in letterboxes, something that was said.”
Another finding: In 92 percent of cases, the courts gave sentences of less than a year in prison before the person was eligible for parole, and in all but two cases, the prison terms were for less than 24 months. Such short sentences, the report says, might better involve intensive correction orders, or I.C.O.s, involving home detention or sentences in which the offender undergoes community service therapy instead of serving time in prison.
“One of the reasons Aboriginal people offend is because of past traumas they’ve suffered in their lives,” said Bunja Smith, chairman for the Aboriginal Legal Service. “The crux of I.C.O. involves therapy. It’s actually working with the person to change their behavior so that they do not continue to offend in such a way.”
“When you put someone in jail for such an offense, they haven’t actually learned that the behavior is wrong,” he added.
