The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• Cardinal George Pell returns to Australia.
• An ABC segment on President Trump resonates in Washington.
• A Melbourne cafe’s clever solution to coffee-cup waste.
The Australian Federal Police were waiting to escort Cardinal George Pell from Sydney Airport when he disembarked from a flight this morning.
Cardinal Pell, Australia’s highest-ranking Roman Catholic official, has returned to the country from the Vatican less than two weeks after the Victoria police confirmed that he’d been charged with sexual abuse offenses.
A passenger aboard the flight told The Sydney Morning Herald that Cardinal Pell, who traveled in business class, appeared “calm and not stressed.” The cardinal left the airport through a side entrance and did not answer any questions.
Cardinal Pell arrived just before 6 a.m. from Singapore. A spokesman explained in a statement that the cardinal had staggered his flights home on the advice of his doctors. The spokesman said that his return today “should not be a surprise.”
“When he was told of the charges by the Victoria police, Cardinal Pell said in Rome he totally rejected the allegations, was completely innocent of the charges and would return to Australia to vigorously defend himself and clear his name,” the statement said.
What happens next?
“It is rare for a cardinal, a prince of the church, to be accused of sexual abuse,”  Jacqueline Williams wrote in our initial coverage of the charges.
Cardinal Pell has repeatedly denied the allegations against him. He will face the Melbourne Magistrates Court on July 26 for a filing hearing.
Cardinal Pell moved to the Vatican in 2014, leaving his post as the archbishop of Sydney.
In late June, Anthony Fisher, the current archbishop of Sydney, confirmed that the church would not be covering the cardinal’s legal fees. We reported on the Australian Catholics who have stepped up to do so.
[10:34 a.m.]
Call it a rare moment in the spotlight for Australian morning television. On Sunday’s “Insiders,” the Australian Broadcasting Corporation’s political editor, Chris Uhlmann, filed a segment that resonated globally.
Reporting from the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, Mr. Uhlmann delivered a scathing critique of President Trump’s performance at the meeting and in his time in office to date.
Mr. Uhlmann’s comments reverberated far and wide, trending on Twitter in Washington, charging to the front page of Reddit and drawing coverage from publications internationally.
A group that seemed particularly enamored with Mr. Uhlmann’s report? Some left-leaning members of the American news media.
Mr. Uhlmann’s no-holds barred report comes at a time when many American news outlets are on the defensive for their coverage of the Trump administration, which is becoming more and more combative with individual reporters and news organizations.
The comments may be even more eyebrow-raising considering Mr. Uhlmann’s place on the political spectrum. The longtime broadcaster is a conservative who, in 1998, ran on the ticket of the right-leaning Christian independent Paul Osborne in the Australian Capital Territory.
[10:54 a.m.]
A soon-to-open Melbourne cafe is resisting waste in hospitality with a simple idea: the Emergency Mug Wall.
Locals from the suburb of Brunswick responded to a call-out from the cafe, Handsome Her, donating their spare mugs to a drop-off spot at the back entrance.
The owner, Alex O’Brien, has worked in cafes for years. “One thing that gets to me is how much waste we make,” she said.
No disposable cups will be offered when Handsome Her opens at the start of August. Instead, two espresso bars will be built into the cafe, where people are encouraged to stay and drink coffee at a discount.
Are takeaway cups really that bad?
Earlier this year, the comedian Craig Reucassel drove a tram around Melbourne that was stuffed to the windows with 50,000 coffee cups — the amount he claimed Melburnians send straight to the landfill every 30 minutes.
His three-part television series, “The War on Waste,” which appeared on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation in May, estimated that Australians use close to a billion takeaway cups a year, most of which can’t be recycled because of a plastic lining inside the cup.
One coffee shop in Perth has also banned takeaway cups. It keeps a tally of the disposable cups it’s avoided sending to landfills, counting 70,000 saved in one year.
[4:10 p.m.]
