Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
Adam Ferguson grew up in regional Australia but made a name for himself photographing violence and war in Pakistan, Afghanistan, India and Iraq. In December, The New York Times brought him home for a deep look at Australia’s outback.
This morning, we published the stunning result: Through the Outback, an essay in image, word and design that we hope will bring alive the realities of Australia’s interior for our readers all over the world.
Adam spent more than three months shooting and reporting. He traveled by camper van and truck on a journey of more 19,000 kilometers (12,000 miles), across desert, mines, wheat belts and cattle stations, meeting dozens of characters, including Daisy Ward, pictured above.
His project is in many ways a testament to the openness of those he encountered. “One cliché that rang true on my travels was genuine country hospitality,” he writes.
Adam also had a mission in mind — one that many Australians may find familiar. In a separate Q. and A. for Times Insider, he explained his motivation at the start:
Scrolling through Adam’s images once again this morning as the sun comes up over Sydney, Through the Outback is, to me, both a personal journey that reflects the experience of a talented Australian with a global photographic perspective; and also a reflection of how The Times thinks about its role around the world, including here in Australia.
A common refrain from Bill Keller, our former executive editor and a longtime foreign correspondent, comes to mind: “When in doubt... Go.”
It’s something he used to tell many of us who have spent our lives journeying for journalism, and Adam’s piece embodies that search for people and places that might be overlooked.
Below are just a few of the dozens of images that the project contains. You should really see the whole thing. While it’s impossible for any one photographer to capture the entirety of the outback, even those who know the interior well may find a surprising image or impression.
I’m also including in this week’s newsletter a few other signature visual projects from The Times — some of my favorites that I thought you all might enjoy. And I end with a reader suggestion from Noosa that yielded this week’s recommendation.
As always, share this newsletter if you like it and tell us what you think at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
Now here are a few more of my favorite visual projects from the past few years...
An annual feat of impressive photography and photo editing from The Times, this feature pulls together the most powerful pictures of a given year. The 2016 edition includes stunning photography from all over the world, including the American presidential campaign. It’s worth revisiting.
______
I admit, I’m biased: Cuba is still my first love, the country I’ll never get enough of even after more than a decade of visiting. This photo essay by Tomás Munita, a Chilean photographer who I worked with all over Latin America, captures so much of what makes the country so magnetic.
______
Photography and visual journalism now includes many things — like 360-degree cameras and drones. Josh Haner, a staff photographer, has become a master of the latter and there’s no better way to grasp the value of what that means than this Greenland project about climate change. Every time I look at it, I can almost feel the cold air hitting my face. For a bout of transparency and technical gadgetry, check out Josh explaining how it all came together.
______
Finally, there’s this: a visual, immersive look at the South China Sea with photos and video shot by Ashley Gilbertson who, like Adam Ferguson, is an Australian photographer who shoots all over the world for The Times. Ashley told me he pitched this story to The New York Times Magazine, and you can draw a line between how his story from 2013 is presented digitally and the other projects above.
What all of these projects show is that even as we continue to invest in world-class photography, we continue to innovate in terms of how we treat and present visual storytelling.
______
As some of you know from my last newsletter, I was on the road last week in Queensland. Following the advice of an Australia Letter reader named Craig Grant, we ended up at The Grind cafe in Noosaville, where the hash brown breakfasts made me completely rethink my indifference to shaved potatoes. Great coffee, nice views and friendly staff made it worth the visit.
The coastal walks around Noosa were also outstanding.
Next week, I’ll be further afield reporting around Mission Beach and Townsville. Got a suggestion? Let me know at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
