The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• Senator Scott Ludlam resigns after learning that he has New Zealand citizenship.
• A former prime minister defends President Trump.
• The debate on cybersecurity and crime continues.
• Analyzing an age-old feud on Australia’s roads.
How’s this for a Friday surprise: Scott Ludlam, the longtime Greens senator from Western Australia, resigned this afternoon after realizing he was ineligible to serve under the Constitution. Why? Because he’s a dual citizen of Australia and New Zealand.
Mr. Ludlam, who was the Greens’ deputy leader, made a name for himself with his stirring, viral-bound speeches and stern antinuclear campaigning. One of his last acts as a member of Parliament was speaking before the United Nations plenary in a week in which it adopted a historic nuclear weapons ban. “It’s not a bad way to go out,” Mr. Ludlam wrote on Facebook.
Commenters responding to the announcement were quick to draw comparisons between Mr. Ludlam and former Prime Minister Tony Abbott, who has long dismissed rumors that he also held British citizenship when he was first elected to Australian Parliament in 1994. Senator Derryn Hinch of Victoria has previously said that Mr. Abbott should produce a dated British citizenship revocation.
Late this afternoon, he did.
Two of Australia’s closest allies, the United States and Britain, allow dual citizens to run for office. However, it can still be considered a political sticking point: During last year’s American election, Donald J. Trump regularly (and incorrectly) accused Senator Ted Cruz of Texas of also holding citizenship in Canada.
[3:48 p.m.]
Former Prime Minister John Howard says that people writing off President Trump now are foolish, unable to accept the results of the American election.
Speaking at a United States Studies Center event at the University of Sydney, Mr. Howard said most criticisms of Mr. Trump came down to his “locker-room” manner, not his policy.
“You’ve got to look through the style,” Mr. Howard said. “Some of the things he has done on the international stage have been unsettling. But he’s done a number of things as president that are very praiseworthy.”
One of those things, in Mr. Howard’s view: Mr. Trump’s swift strikes on Syria in April. Mr. Howard called Mr. Trump’s handling of the Syrian conflict “outstanding.”
Last February, during Mr. Trump’s rise toward the Republican nomination, Mr. Howard said that he “trembled at the thought of Trump being president.” That trembling, it appears, has settled.
One other interesting revelation from last night was Mr. Howard’s lurch away from mainstream thinking on the climate. “I have increasingly become more of a skeptic on climate change,” he said. For critics of his refusal to sign the Kyoto Protocol, though, that might not be a revelation at all.
Mr. Howard, who led Australia into the 2003 Iraq war, has long enjoyed strong relations with the Republican Party in the United States — in particular the Bush family.
George W. Bush even painted a portrait of Mr. Howard, above. It was revealed in 2014, along with a series of other portraits that garnered a positive New York Times review.
[9:57 a.m.]
An interview that the prime minister did on the Seven News program “Sunrise” kicked off yet another debate on whether software companies like Apple, Facebook and WhatsApp should cooperate with national governments and allow access to encrypted information.
Here’s Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull on “Sunrise”:
Here’s a response from Elaine Pearson, Australia director for the Human Rights Watch:
And finally, in a rare bit of polite candor, here’s a representative for Facebook who spoke to Fairfax Media today:
Translation: Sorry, Mr. Turnbull, there’s just no way we’re decrypting.
[3:40 p.m.]
Peer into the center of any urban hub and you’re likely to see an ancient, embittered relationship: that between cyclists and those who share the road with them. Whether it’s on the Brooklyn Bridge or on the Bayside Cycling Trail in Melbourne, the men and women in Lycra have a way of attracting the concentrated ire of the rest of the commuting public.
Roads are unquestionably dangerous for cyclists in Australia: Dozens are killed each year, and thousands are hospitalized.
But numbers don’t quite show how insidious some incidents have been. This week, oil slicks were found on the Capital City Trail in Melbourne, a celebrated cyclist route that isn’t shared by cars but is popular among pedestrians. The Metropolitan Fire Brigade cleaned up puddles of oil twice in one day.
On Yarra Boulevard in Kew, another popular biking route, a local council has spent tens of thousands of dollars to sweep up large tacks with magnets. The tacks have been dumped on the road regularly for two years, with the apparent aim of injuring cyclists.
Behind the animosity
Ed Hore, president of the Australian Cycle Alliance, says the media is responsible for much of the fury against cyclists.
“If you look at some of the ways that the media used to portray cycling, it’s very much the whole idea of the cars versus bike thing, which is a stupid idea,” he said.
Mr. Hore says that media coverage had played a major role in creating animosity between drivers and riders.
“Our biggest claim to fame was ‘Family Feud’: ‘What Are 10 Things That Make You Angry About Bike Riders?’ The No. 1 answer was, ‘Everything.’ Those things give people the idea that they’re allowed to hate on cyclists. Now, you’re not allowed to hate on religion, on sexual orientation, on race — but it’s quite acceptable to hate on cyclists.”
Ian Walker, associate dean in social sciences at the University of Bath in England, has spent years researching the psychology behind the hostility. His work leads him to blame an older foible: human bias.
“There’s a whole series of social psychology research going back quite a few years, now,” he said. “It shows, clearly, that people are very horrible. The least sign of difference is enough for people to start showing prejudice to each other.”
Dr. Walker explained that the tendency showed itself, scientifically, even in arbitrary contexts.
“If you get a bunch of people in a room and toss a coin and separate them into groups of ‘heads’ and ‘tails,’ within a few minutes, they’ll start discriminating against each other,” he said. “It’s very deeply rooted in us.”
Cyclists, though, may have a clearer group of traits that lead drivers to designate them as “others.”
“The analogy that always comes to mind is vegetarians. If you think about it, there’s a lot in common between those two groups,” he said. “Both slightly outside mainstream culture. Both potentially have a sustainability side to what they do. They both represent a challenge to mainstream culture.”
But, Dr. Walker said, another intrinsic human drive may also be involved: the demand for resources. Or, road space.
“If cyclists only ever did mountain biking, I can’t imagine this issue would arise,” he said.
In his research, Dr. Walker found precious few ways for cyclists to lessen aggression toward them on roads, but gender may play a role. For example, drivers generally leave more space when passing women than men — a finding that has been repeated in studies around the world.
Another deterrent? The threat of consequences. For one study, Dr. Walker dressed cyclists in various outfits and observed driver behavior. One ensemble displayed the words, “Novice cyclist: Please pass slowly.”
“The only outfit that made any difference was one that, written on the back, said that it was videoing the journey,” he said. “Depressingly, it’s only the fear of being caught that had any effect on drivers’ behavior.”
[5:02 a.m.]
