Living on the Edge (of Australia’s Cities). Also  Is Gun Amnesty Effective? And Melbourne’s ‘Cascading’ Development.
 The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• The new suburbs are where families are chasing the Australian property dream.
• Why Australia is imposing the first nationwide gun amnesty since 1996.
• Could one of Melbourne’s oldest suburbs be ruined by a “cascading” apartment complex?
According to the all-knowing being that is the 2016 census, Australia is getting older, more populous and more diverse. At the same time, the cost of living and the median rent have continued to surge. So where are people, particularly newcomers, going to build their lives? Sydney and Melbourne remain the two biggest hot spots — but some areas experiencing the largest surges in growth are the newly formed suburbs outside the capital cities.
“As the population increases, cities move further and further out to form a metropolitan area,” says Liz Allen, a demographer at Australian National University. “It’s about affording the lifestyle they want.”
More green space, a free-standing house and a big backyard that will not break the bank are among the reasons families decide to head to those areas. Here are three such regions.
Serpentine, southeast of Perth
Since the last census in 2011, the population in this region outside Perth has grown about 50 percent, and 26,873 people now call it home. The median rent is $310 a week. Serpentine is a hub for immigrants from England and New Zealand: About 32 percent of its residents were not born in Australia.
Dr. Allen said she suspected that the mining boom made surrounding areas too expensive to live in, making Serpentine more attractive. “It’s mostly younger people living here, not older people or retirees,” she said.
Craigieburn, north of Melbourne
Five years ago, 52 percent of Craigieburn’s population had two parents who were born overseas; now it’s 61 percent, as the suburb draws more and more immigrants from countries like India, Iraq and Sri Lanka. The median rent is $335 dollars a week. And in the region to the west, where a new suburb has gained traction, more than 14,000 people have moved in.
Gungahlin, north of Canberra
In five years, the region’s population has increased 150 percent. The lack of affordable housing coincided with areas of new land being released to the public, Dr. Allen said. The median weekly rent is $390. Of Gungahlin’s residents, 38 percent were born outside Australia, largely in Asian countries like China, India, Vietnam and Korea. It’s a region to watch, Dr. Allen said, because Gungahlin has one of the highest rates of birth in the country. Families seem to be shifting north, she said, from Tuggeranong, an area once known as “Nappy Valley” because of its high concentration of young families.
And a unicorn...
… in rent prices if you’re really looking to shake things up: Look to Ashburton, a mining region in Western Australia. In 2016, the median rent was $32 a week, a drop in the last 10 years.
[12:48 p.m.]
On July 1, the government introduced the National Firearms Amnesty — a three-month program that will give Australians the chance to hand in unregistered firearms without consequence or cost.
Australia is a different country now, but it’s important to remember: Over 18 years starting in the late 1970s, there were 13 mass shootings. The deadliest was the Port Arthur massacre in Tasmania, which killed 35 people in 1996. That year, the relatively new prime minister, John Howard, embarked on a remarkable — and successful — 12-day quest to impose gun-control regulations. Mr. Howard wore a bulletproof vest when he explained the measures to gun owners in Victoria.
For all the cultural values the United States and Australia share, each instance of mass gun violence in America seems to leave Australians scratching their heads and gently pointing their friends to the results of their tougher policies.
The data is overwhelming. The current rate of 
