In Their Own Words  Marine Le Pen and Emmanuel Macron
It wasn’t supposed to happen. A year ago, few predicted that the French presidential race would boil down to a matchup between Marine Le Pen, a far-right candidate from a party with a racist, anti-Semitic legacy, and an upstart former banker who had never held elective office, Emmanuel Macron. But here we are.
Voters now face two starkly different choices at the polls on Sunday.
What will become of France if Ms. Le Pen, the anti-immigrant, anti-European Union candidate, defies the polls and vaults into the Élysée Palace? Conversely, what would be in store for a country run by Mr. Macron, her centrist rival?
Here, in their own words — taken from speeches, interviews and campaign platforms — is a window into France’s possible future.
— Ms. Le Pen, in an interview with the German magazine Der Spiegel in 2014
— Mr. Macron, from his platform on his website, translated from French
— Ms. Le Pen, at a rally in April in Marseille, a city with many immigrants. She has pledged to clamp down on, expel, stamp out and restrict immigration, and to make France “more French.”
— Mr. Macron, on his website
— Ms. Le Pen, in a debate among the five major candidates in March 
— Mr. Macron, in an interview this year
— Ms. Le Pen, at the rally in Marseille in April, in The Times of London
— Mr. Macron, in a speech in February, according to the website FrenchElection.online
— Ms. Le Pen, at the rally in Marseille
— Mr. Macron, who called  Ms. Le Pen’s National Front “xenophobic,” during a visit to a sports complex in Sarcelles, a working-class immigrant suburb of Paris, in April, according to The Associated Press
— Ms. Le Pen, on “60 Minutes”
— Mr. Macron, in an interview with The New York Times 
— Ms. Le Pen, after the deadly Bataclan terrorist attacks in Paris in 2015, according to The Guardian 
— Mr. Macron, after a gunman tied to the Islamic State killed a police officer on the Champs-Élysées in April 
— Ms. Le Pen, after the Champs-Élysées attack, according to CNN. “It is time to stop being naïve,” she told RFI radio, and she has said that if elected, she would deport all foreign citizens on the terrorism watch list.
— Mr. Macron, who says he wants to force internet companies to release encrypted messages between people suspected of terrorism, according to the BBC
— Ms. Le Pen, in Nice (which she called a “martyr city of Islamic terrorism”) in April, according to The Washington Post. A man drove a truck into a crowd there in July 2016, killing more than 80 people. 
— Ms. Le Pen, on “60 Minutes” 
— Mr. Macron, on his  website
— Ms. Le Pen, on “60 Minutes”
— Mr. Macron, on his website 
— Ms. Le Pen, on “60 Minutes.” Ms. Le Pen would also ban skullcaps in public, any conspicuous symbol of religious belief, she said.
— Mr. Macron, on his website

— Ms. Le Pen, on “60 Minutes”
— Mr. Macron, firing back at Ms. Le Pen during the debate of the five major candidates in March 
— Ms. Le Pen, to supporters at a rally in April, according to The Times of London
— Mr. Macron, from his platforms website
— Ms. Le Pen, in Der Spiegel in 2014
— Mr. Macron, on his website
— Ms. Le Pen, to Europe 1 radio in 2014, according to The New Statesman
— Mr. Macron, during a visit to London in February, in The Sydney Morning Herald
— Ms. Le Pen, who wants to pull France out of the euro and restore the franc, at a rally in April, according to Reuters
— Mr. Macron, in The Daily Telegraph in April 
— Mr. Macron, on the campaign trail 
— Ms. Le Pen, in a speech to supporters 

— Mr. Macron, at a Whirlpool factory in Amiens in April, where Ms. Le Pen upstaged him by bringing treats for workers and posing for selfies. He was booed.
— Ms. Le Pen, in Der Spiegel
— Mr. Macron, on his website
