The Cases Against Netanyahu and a Decision to Indict
JERUSALEM — After an investigation of more than two years, Israel’s attorney general, Avichai Mandelblit, announced Thursday that he planned to indict Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on charges of bribery, fraud and breach of trust.
Mr. Netanyahu, who denies any wrongdoing and says he is being persecuted by Israel’s left, is entitled to a hearing before an indictment is formally issued.
But if he fails to persuade Mr. Mandelblit to back down, he would become the first sitting prime minister in Israel to face criminal prosecution.
[Read here about the decision to charge the prime minister.]
Here is a summary of the allegations against Mr. Netanyahu, as well as the charges Mr. Mandelblit is pursuing and his reasoning for doing so. It is based on documents released Thursday by the Ministry of Justice.
THE PLAYERS Arnon Milchan, the Hollywood producer; James Packer, an Australian billionaire.
THE QUID Expensive cigars, jewelry and pink Champagne flowed abundantly into the prime minister’s official Jerusalem residence, sometimes at his or his wife’s request, but always with the compliments of Mr. Milchan or Mr. Packer, whom Mr. Milchan enlisted to share the cost of the gifts. The value of the gifts came to hundreds of thousands of dollars.
THE QUO Mr. Netanyahu promoted the extension of a 10-year tax exemption to expatriate Israelis returning to the country, which could benefit Mr. Milchan financially. The Finance Ministry blocked the legislation, saying it was against the national interest and fiscally unsound. Mr. Packer is not accused of receiving anything in return for his gifts to the Netanyahus.
THE DECISION Mr. Netanyahu should be charged with fraud and breach of trust. Because it was impossible to prove that the gifts were given to Mr. Netanyahu because of his position, the case does not meet the threshold for bribery.
THE PLAYERS Arnon Mozes, the publisher of Yediot Ahronot, a leading Israeli daily newspaper; Sheldon Adelson, the Las Vegas casino magnate, a devoted supporter of Mr. Netanyahu’s and the financial backer of Israel Hayom, a rival paper; Ari Harow, Mr. Netanyahu’s former chief of staff, who turned state’s evidence.
THE QUID Mr. Netanyahu discussed with Mr. Mozes the possibility of using his influence with Mr. Adelson, and perhaps of advancing legislation, to curb the circulation of Israel Hayom, which has long been seen as slavishly promoting Mr. Netanyahu’s interests.
THE QUO In return, Yediot Ahronot would treat Mr. Netanyahu and his family more favorably and “help him succeed in upcoming elections,” according to Mr. Mandelblit.
THE CATCH The trade was discussed, including on phone calls recorded by Mr. Harow, but was never consummated.
THE DECISION Mr. Netanyahu should be charged with fraud and breach of trust. The evidence did not sufficiently prove that he had “requested or made a bribe,” but he “violated the duty of trust owed to the public.” Mr. Mozes should be charged with bribery.
THE PLAYERS Shaul Elovitch, a media tycoon and friend of Mr. Netanyahu’s; Shlomo Filber, the director-general of the communications ministry under Mr. Netanyahu; and Nir Hefetz, the Netanyahu family’s public relations adviser. Mr. Filber and Mr. Hefetz became government witnesses.
THE QUID  While serving as prime minister, Mr. Netanyahu also held the post of communications minister from 2014 to 2017. Mr. Elovitch, who had long shared ownership of the Yes satellite network with Bezeq, Israel’s biggest telecommunications company, bought a controlling stake in Bezeq in 2010. Heavily in debt, he arranged for Bezeq to buy Yes in 2015 for several times more than independent valuations showed Yes was worth. The communications ministry under Mr. Netanyahu aided several of Mr. Elovitch’s moves, effectively helping him reap tens of millions of dollars. The police said they had seized about $32 million in ill-gotten gains.
THE QUO Bezeq also owns Walla, one of Israel’s leading news sites. At the direction of Mr. Elovitch and Mr. Hefetz, Walla consistently provided gauzy coverage of Mr. Netanyahu and his wife, suppressing or softening critical reports, padding inconsequential items with flattering photographs and acceding to hundreds of the couple’s demands. The demands increased around the 2013 and 2015 elections and during coverage of scandals involving the Netanyahus.
THE DECISION Mr. Netanyahu should be charged with bribery, fraud and breach of trust. Mr. Elovitch should face prosecution for bribery, obstruction of justice, money laundering and a securities violation. Though Mr. Netanyahu’s wife, Sara, was “very involved in the demands” of Walla, there was insufficient evidence that she knew what official action was being provided in return, so she should not face charges. The state attorney believed Mrs. Netanyahu should also face bribery charges.
