5 Who Killed Boris Nemtsov, Putin Foe, Sentenced in Russia
MOSCOW — It was the most prominent political murder in Russia since President Vladimir V. Putin came to power.
Shortly before midnight on Feb. 27, 2015, the opposition leader Boris Y. Nemtsov was gunned down a few steps away from the Kremlin as he and his girlfriend were walking home across a bridge from Red Square.
On Thursday, a court in Moscow sentenced the Chechen former security services officer, who was convicted of pulling the trigger, to 20 years in prison; four accomplices were ordered to serve 11 to 19 years.
The shooting of Mr. Nemtsov, a charismatic opposition leader who antagonized the Kremlin, ended his two-decade democratic crusade that began in the wake of the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991, and continued through the authoritarian rise of Mr. Putin.
An atomic physicist by training, Mr. Nemtsov became active in politics in the late 1980s and organized protests against the planned construction of nuclear reactors in his home city, Nizhny Novgorod, about 250 miles east of Moscow.
After the end of Communist rule, he became a vocal proponent of pluralistic democracy under President Boris N. Yeltsin, who appointed him governor of Nizhny Novgorod in 1992. Mr. Nemtsov was just 32 years old at the time, a handsome and confident member of a new breed of Russian leaders who, with an eye on the West, foresaw an ambitious path forward for their country and its ailing economy.
Mr. Nemtsov went on to become a deputy prime minister in Mr. Yeltsin’s administration, and he had been regarded as the president’s heir apparent. But Mr. Nemtsov, like many other members of Russia’s political elite, was tainted by the political missteps and corruption that characterized Russia in the 1990s, though he was not implicated in any wrongdoing.
Mr. Nemtsov was outmaneuvered by Mr. Putin, a former K.G.B. agent, when it came time to replace Mr. Yeltsin as president.
Other politicians from the Yeltsin years went on to pursue lucrative business deals — sometimes taking advantage of their official positions — or dropped out of view when Mr. Putin assumed the presidency. Yet Mr. Nemtsov embraced his opposition role.
He was a leader of the Union of Right Forces, a party that tried in the early 2000s to counter Mr. Putin’s consolidation of power. His efforts drew the ire of Putin loyalists: The state-controlled news media and Kremlin supporters called Mr. Nemtsov corrupt and a traitor, and spread propaganda to undermine his popular appeal.
