Family of Shamima Begum, ISIS Teenager, Says Britain Plans to Revoke Her Citizenship
LONDON — The British government has told the family of Shamima Begum, a 19-year-old woman who traveled to Syria to marry an Islamic State fighter four years ago, that it intends to revoke her citizenship, according to a family lawyer.
Through a statement released by the lawyer, Tasnime Akunjee, Ms. Begum’s family said it was “very disappointed with the Home Office’s intention to have an order made depriving Shamima of her citizenship.”
“We are considering all legal avenues to challenge this decision,” it added.
In a letter sent to Ms. Begum’s mother and obtained by the broadcaster ITV News, the British Home Office said the decision had been made by Home Secretary Sajid Javid on Tuesday.
Ms. Begum will be allowed to appeal the order through the courts, according to the letter.
British law prevents the government from stripping someone’s citizenship if doing so would render the person stateless. But British news outlets reported that because Ms. Begum’s mother has a Bangladeshi passport, the Home Office decided that it could remove her British citizenship.
A Home Office spokeswoman said of Mr. Javid in a statement: “In order to protect this country, he has the power to deprive someone of their British citizenship where it would not render them stateless. We do not comment on individual cases, but any decisions to deprive individuals of their citizenship are based on all available evidence and not taken lightly.”
Ms. Begum gave birth to a boy in recent days as she made pleas from a Syrian refugee camp for help returning home to Britain. The move to revoke her citizenship was quickly criticized by leaders from the opposition Labour Party and Liberal Democrats, who said she should instead face any consequences within the British legal system.
Stella Creasy, a Labour member of Parliament, said Mr. Javid was trying to burnish his antiterrorism credentials as he made a bid to become leader of the Conservative Party.
“However horrific her defence of ISIS,” Ms. Creasy wrote on Twitter, “if the Home Secretary can start with stripping this woman and her week-old child of their citizenship for his leadership bid….where does it end?”
In 2015, Ms. Begum, who is from the Bethnal Green area of East London and was then 15, made headlines when she traveled to Syria with two classmates at the height of the Islamic State’s power in the region. The three young women flew to Turkey from Gatwick Airport and then boarded a bus to the Syrian border. They soon became the poster girls for young Westerners looking to join the group.
Ms. Begum was recently found by a British reporter in a refugee camp in Syria after fleeing the last remaining Islamic State stronghold in the country. Last week, she told the reporter she wanted to return home to Britain. Days later, she gave birth to the baby boy.
This week, Mr. Javid wrote an op-ed article for The Sunday Times in which he vowed to stop those who had joined the Islamic State from returning to Britain, saying the Home Office could bar non-British citizens from entry to the country, or strip “dangerous individuals” of their British citizenship. He said the office had used those so-called deprivation powers more than 100 times.
“As home secretary, my priority is to ensure the safety and security of this country — and I will not let anything jeopardize that,” he wrote. “These are not judgments to be taken based purely on emotion and empathy. We look at the facts of each case, the law and the threat to national security.”
Ms. Begum has said she does not regret going to Syria. She told The Times of London that seeing a severed head there did not faze her because “it was from a captured fighter seized on the battlefield, an enemy of Islam.” But she also said that she had done little more in Syria than take care of her husband and children, and that she had never made propaganda for the Islamic State or recruited others.
