By inviting the Philippines' Rodrigo Duterte to the White House, Donald Trump emboldens a killer
   Who you invite to your house says a lot about who you are. No matter your status, the company you keep reflects your values. Invite a thug, serve him a meal and laugh at his jokes — what does that make you? 
   The thug invitations have come out of the White House, now featuring an invitation to a man who stands accused of murder, who backs extrajudicial killing in his country and who has denounced the United States. 
   His name is Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines, known at home to his friends as "the Crusher." 
   Duterte's host, Donald Trump, invited him to the White House — the People's House — on behalf of you and me. 
   If you are not appalled, you should be. Here's why. 
   Duterte's a killer. In December 2016 reminiscing over his time as mayor of Davao, a city in the southern Philippines, Duterte was quoted saying: "In Davao I used to do it personally. Just to show to the guys (police) that if I can do it why can't you? And I'd go around in Davao with a motorcycle, with a big bike around, and I would just patrol the streets, looking for trouble also. I was really looking for a confrontation so I could kill." 
   Later in December he admitted, while serving as a prosecutor in Davao, to having thrown a rape suspect out of a helicopter. 
   That's only the tip of the iceberg. 
   His government stands accused of killing over 7,000 people since coming to power in the middle of 2016. Operation Double Barrel, as the bloodletting is known, allegedly targets "drug kingpins." The 7000 dead, however, test the definition of kingpin. Human Rights Watch published a report in March 2017 explaining that many of those killed were among the poorest of the poor Filipinos and hardly drug kingpins. 
   Last December, then-President-elect Trump said that Duterte was tackling drugs "the right way," presumably referring to the use of violence and ignoring the rule of law. Trump is no champion of the U.S. Constitution and its system of checks and balances, having recently denounced at least some of them as a really "bad thing for the country." 
   Perhaps at dinner the two men can compare notes on getting around constitutional protections. 
   Not only has Duterte unleashed a wave of state-sanctioned extra-judicial violence, but he's also managed to upend the U.S.-Philippine security relationship. In October 2016 during a visit to Beijing, Duterte announced his country's "separation" from the U.S. He added that he would welcome Chinese and Russian support. In a later speech he taunted us further, saying "bye bye, America." 
   This is why the White House has invited him for dinner. They want to win the Philippines back to their side in their quest to shore up security alliances in the face of a rising China and threatening North Korea. 
   The trouble is they want to do this on the back of Filipino peasants. 
   Inviting Duterte to the White House is not the only tool available to the U.S. in trying to win the Philippines back into the fold. It has already announced Trump will visit the Philippines during the ASEAN leaders meeting in November. What added benefit is there to hosting Duterte, except to give succor to his presidency? 
   As they discuss problems of strategy, Duterte will smile knowing that in his home country, his supporters will be happy. The White House meeting will be proof that the Crusher's strategy has worked, that the U.S. has backed down in its defense of the innocent victims of Duterte's drug war. 
   A White House invitation to Duterte should be a reward for once he changes his tune on the use of violence for "civic improvement" — if that day ever comes. With Trump's approval, there is little incentive for Duterte to change his ways. 
   In the morning before meeting the Philippine president, while standing in front of the mirror for his morning shave, President Trump should ask himself if he wishes to be known as a friend to thugs. Or, would he prefer to be a defender of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Sadly, we seem to already know the answer. 
   Tidwell is director of the Center for Australian, New Zealand and Pacific Studies at the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service, Georgetown University.   
