ISIS Fighter’s Australian Citizenship Is Revoked Under Antiterror Laws
SYDNEY, Australia — An Islamic State fighter who posted a photo of a beheaded Syrian soldier online has become the first dual national to be stripped of his Australian citizenship under antiterrorism laws, according to local news reports.
A spokeswoman for the Australian Immigration Department said in an interview that someone had been stripped of citizenship under antiterrorism laws but declined to divulge the person’s name. But a leading newspaper, The Australian, identified the person as Khaled Sharrouf, 35, reporting that a secret panel of intelligence officials, police officers and lawyers had revoked his Australian citizenship this year.
“If there was a poster boy for stripping citizenship, it’s Khaled Sharrouf,” said Rodger Shanahan, a research fellow at the Lowy Institute for International Policy in Sydney.
Australia, a longtime ally of the United States in its fight against Islamic militants in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, is on alert for potential attacks by Islamic extremists, including fighters returning from conflict zones. About 100 Australians are believed to be fighting or engaged with terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq, according to the Attorney-General’s Department. Mr. Sharrouf is believed to still be in Islamic State territory.
Under a law passed in 2015, the government can strip the Australian citizenship from people who hold a second nationality if they are found to have been members of a terrorist group or engaged in terrorism-related activity. The action against Mr. Sharrouf represents the first use of the powers in that measure, the Australian Citizenship Amendment Bill.
Mark Dreyfus, the shadow attorney general from the opposition Labor Party, said the law was written to make sure the right balance was struck between security and citizens’ rights.
“We trust this power will continue to be used in sparing and prudent fashion,” Mr. Dreyfus said in a statement.
Mr. Sharrouf, who was born to Lebanese parents in Australia and holds Lebanese citizenship, served time in prison in Australia for his involvement in a foiled terrorist plot and has publicly declared himself a member of the Islamic State. He gained notoriety in 2014 after he posted a photograph on social media of his son, then 7, holding up the severed head of a Syrian soldier.
The photograph shocked Australians and appalled the former United States secretary of state, John Kerry, who was visiting Australia at the time and called the image “one of the most disturbing, stomach turning, grotesque photographs ever displayed.”
Mr. Sharrouf was said to have had a troubled childhood growing up in southwest Sydney. He had been treated for schizophrenia and was suspected of dealing drugs before being radicalized. He traveled to Syria in 2013 and was followed by his wife, an Australian who is believed to have since died, and their five children, all of whom are Australian citizens.
The fate of the children, none of whom are believed to be older than 15, could be a thorny issue, experts said.
“I don’t think anybody has problems with having Khaled Sharrouf’s citizenship stripped, but there’s a bit of a problem given there’s five children in Syria who are Australian citizens whose mother is dead, and Sharrouf’s now a Lebanese citizen,” said Dr. Shanahan of the Lowy Institute. He added that the children’s maternal grandmother had attempted to bring them back to Australia.
Mr. Sharrouf must now rely on his Lebanese citizenship should he wish to leave the conflict zone.
