Will Russia Meddle in Italy’s Election? It May Not Have To
ROME — It happened in the United States. Then there were the Netherlands, France and Germany. One after the other, the West’s leading democracies have staged national elections in which Russia is accused of using social media and fake news to try to influence the outcome.
Now, Italy is holding pivotal elections on Sunday that could shake Europe — and Russian meddling is again a concern. 
But the difference this time is that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia might not even need to bother, because the parties most likely to do well in Italy would probably be favored by Russia, too.
Much has changed since Russia started its online misinformation campaigns, and much of it is good for Mr. Putin.
Just two years ago, Mr. Putin was on the defensive and facing the prospect of Hillary Clinton, no fan of his, occupying the White House. Instead, he got President Trump.
While Mr. Putin did not get his top picks in France and Germany, the angry populism and frustration with migration that is reshaping European politics has significantly weakened his chief adversary, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, and suspicions of yet another Russian hacking roiled the German government on Thursday.
Italy is already traditionally one of the most pro-Russian countries in Europe, and among the favored outcomes for Mr. Putin in Sunday’s election, there are a lot to choose from.
Many of the leading parties share a widespread view that the sanctions against Russia for its land grab in Ukraine hurt Italian trading partners as much as they do Moscow, noted Lucio Caracciolo, the editor of the Italian geopolitical magazine Limes.
While Italy does not carry the weight of Germany or France, he said, having an Italian government willing to resist its Western partners furthers Russia’s interest in dividing European countries from the United States and one another.
“Any division inside NATO and the European Union could be used, maybe not now, but in the future,” he said. “It’s better to face a fractured enemy.”
The favored center-right coalition is led by none other than Mr. Putin’s good friend Silvio Berlusconi, the former prime minister who opposes sanctions against Russia, and who recently gave Mr. Putin a birthday present of a duvet cover of the two pals shaking hands. Years ago, Mr. Berlusconi was caught on tape apparently telling a prostitute to wait for him in the “big bed” that he referred to as “
