SYDNEY, Australia — The Australian media group Nine Entertainment announced a takeover on Thursday of Fairfax Media, publisher of some of the most powerful voices in Australia’s news industry, in a bid to create a media giant encompassing print, television and digital assets.
Critics of the deal immediately raised concerns about concentration of media ownership in Australia and the future editorial independence of Fairfax’s prominent publications, which include The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. The combined business would include Nine’s free-to-air television network and Fairfax’s print and online publications, like The Australian Financial Review and a lucrative online real estate portal, Domain.
“We are confident that the strength of the combined management team and staff will ensure the continuation of our quality journalism,” Greg Hywood, Fairfax’s chief executive, said in a joint statement announcing the merger.
Mr. Hywood is expected to leave Fairfax in about six months. The combined company would be called Nine, and Nine’s current shareholders would own a majority of the new business. The deal, estimated to be worth 4 billion Australian dollars, or roughly $3 billion, is expected to be completed by the end of the year.
The deal comes after new legislation last year that eliminated restrictions separating broadcast media from print, allowing media companies to own more outlets in a city.
Opponents of the deal said the changes would lead to less diversity in what is already one of the world’s most concentrated media markets. Most of Australia’s newspapers, radio stations and television broadcasters are controlled by a handful of owners, like Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp. Mr. Murdoch’s company accounts for nearly two-thirds of daily newspaper circulation here, while Fairfax accounts for nearly a quarter.
Critics also worried about the impact that Nine, known for publishing lighter lifestyle journalism, might have on Fairfax — a journalistic institution in Australia that has long shaped public opinion on politics, business and culture.
“This is an exceptionally bad development,” Paul Keating, former Australian prime minister, said in a statement about the merger, which is the first under the media reforms passed last year. Mr. Keating was an advocate of rules that prohibited the combination of broadcasters and print media publishers, having once famously said that a media owner could be the prince of print or queen of the screen, but not both.
“News of today’s announcement takeover of Fairfax by Channel Nine will change the news landscape of Australia altogether,” Mr. Keating said.
Though Mr. Hywood said there would be “plenty of Fairfax Media DNA in the merged company,” experts said Fairfax’s rural, suburban and regional publications would most likely have no future in the new combined business.
“It’s catastrophic,” Denis Muller, a senior research fellow at the University of Melbourne’s Center for Advancing Journalism, said of the deal. “It’s clearly a takeover of Fairfax by Nine, and it seems Nine will be calling the editorial shots.”
Like many media companies, Fairfax is struggling to keep readers as the number of news outlets online grows. The company’s stock is still below the levels it reached before the global financial crisis, even as the broader Australian market has bounced back.
“This merger with Fairfax will add another dimension, creating a unique, all-platform, media business that will reach more than half of Australia each day through television, online, print and radio,” Hugh Marks, chief executive of Nine, said in the statement.
“For our audiences and employees, this means we will continue to be able to invest in premium local content across news, sport, entertainment and lifestyle,” he added. Mr. Marks will be the chief executive of the new company, and Peter Costello, a former Liberal Party politician now also with Nine, will be the new chairman.
Wall Street started a bidding war last year for Fairfax Media, with two large American private equity firms, TPG Capital and Hellman & Friedman, valuing the company at nearly $3 billion.
Just weeks before those bids emerged, Fairfax said it would have to reduce staffing sharply at many of its newspapers to contain costs, and experts concluded the driver behind the bids was Domain, which has quietly become Fairfax’s most lucrative business. Domain’s digital revenue grew 15 percent in the six-month period that ended in December, while Fairfax’s overall revenue dropped almost 5 percent.
Both TPG and Hellman & Friedman withdrew last year from buying out Fairfax but did not say why.
