   Fired “Today” host Matt Lauer suggested he’s seen as an “easy mark” in the aftermath of his sexual misconduct scandal. 
   Lauer, who was axed by NBC in November, contended in a new interview that the groups he’s currently fighting against in a New Zealand property battle are “taking advantage” of the controversy that’s surrounded him since his ousting. 
   “I believe the groups that are behind this are, in some ways, unfortunately taking advantage of some difficult times I’ve been through over the past six months. And I think they see me as an easy mark,” Lauer said on the Radio New Zealand show “Checkpoint with John Campbell.” 
   Lauer, 60, purchased the lease to a $9 million ranch in New Zealand last year. Government groups in the island nation are attempting to get Lauer to allow full access to hikers to travel through his property to get to the Hawea Conservation Park, but Lauer is seeking compensation from local officials for him to grant more access. 
   The longtime anchor suggested the groups are attempting to set a precedent with the case, and said the bulk of the media coverage about the situation has referenced his firing by NBC. 
   “I believe they think that New Zealanders are going to find some outrage there,” Lauer said. “I will tell people, they don’t know the circumstances of that situation. I promise you people don’t know. I’m not at liberty to talk, nor do I want to talk about that. But they’re choosing this fight for a reason.” 
   Lauer’s ranch, which is located in Hunter Valley, serves as the only way for the public to get to the conservation park. He has opened part of the property to the public, according to Stuff.co.nz, but the country’s Department of Conservation and the Walking Access Commission both want him to provide more access. 
   He was fired by NBC after he was accused of inappropriate sexual behavior by a female coworker. Three additional women came forward to accuse the longtime anchor of inappropriate behavior in a Variety article published days after his firing. 
   Lauer denied committing any “coercive, aggressive or abusive actions” in a statement five months after the allegations emerged. 
   New Zealand officials nearly took the ranch property away from Lauer after the allegations against him emerged, but ultimately opted not to since he wasn’t charged with a crime. 
