   Could the Padres make the Mets change their mind? 
   It would take a very enticing offer for the lowly Mets, currently sitting in the basement of the National League East, to deal away ace Jacob deGrom or flame-throwing righthander Noah Syndergaard. 
   DeGrom, now a two-time All-Star, leads Major League Baseball with a 1.71 ERA. Although Syndergaard is currently on the disabled list with, er, hand, foot and mouth disease, he has a 2.89 ERA. The Athletic reported Tuesday that the Padres had “checked in” on Thor. 
   While the Mets’ farm system is depleted, San Diego, which is in the hunt for starting pitching, has the best prospects in baseball, according to MLB.com, and a lot to offer. 
   Here’s a look at the seven Padres prospects who were in the top 50 of MLB.com’s Top 100. 
   Fernando Tatis Jr. (No. 3) — The 19-year-old future power-hitter, known for his athleticism and range, underwent surgery Tuesday for a broken left thumb with ligament damage, but the shortstop was hitting .286 with 16 HRs and 43 RBI in Double-A this season. Although MLB.com ranked Tatis at No. 3, ESPN’s Keith Law had him as the top prospect in all of baseball. 
   MacKenzie Gore (No. 13) — This 19-year-old might be the top lefthander in the minors. The Padres selected Gore with the No. 3 overall pick last year. He features a low-to-mid-90s fastball, low-80s slider, mid-70s curveball and a nasty changeup. 
   Francisco Mejia (No. 15) — The top-ranked catching prospect came to the Padres from the Indians in a trade, in which Cleveland got LHP Brad Hand and RHP Adam Cimber. The 22-year-old switch-hitter, who’s also done work at third base and in the outfield, is a natural from both sides of the plate and has a great arm. 
   Luis Urias (No. 29) — This 21-year-old infielder, who plays second base and shortstop, is known for his plate discipline. During his first four seasons in the minors, Urias had more walks than strikeouts. 
   Cal Quantrill (No. 32) — The 23-year-old son of Paul Quantrill features a great 92-95 mph fastball and low-80s changeup combo. 
   Michael Baez (No. 33) — This 22-year-old righthander from Cuba registers in the upper-90s with his fastball, which he pairs with an upper-80s slider. 
   Adrian Morejon (No. 42) — The Cuban lefty still has a bit of work to do to increase his velocity, but despite that — and durability concerns — some evaluators believe the 19-year-old could be a “frontline starter,” according to MLB.com.   
