Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on Australia, news of the world, and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. Want to receive it by email? Sign up here.
______
A few newsletters ago, I asked for your help. Could we, together, vanquish Canada?
Could we add more new sign-ups to the Australia Letter than my colleague, Ian Austen, could add to his newsletter, the Canada Letter?
Since Canada had more than double our subscriber base to pull from, it was an epic challenge. Not quite like trying to reach the third round of the Australian Open when you’re only 15 years old. But sort of.
And you did it.
Marta Kostyuk became the youngest woman to reach the third round of a Grand Slam in 21 years this week; and as of Thursday night, 1,921 people signed up for the Australia Letter since my plea at the end of November, compared to 1,334 for the Canada Letter.
A toast goes to all those who signed up or who helped sign up friends. Thank you. (Here’s the sign-up page for those still eager to contribute.)
Special thanks also goes to those who supported our effort in Australia by giving the gift of a The New York Times subscription for the holidays.
And for those looking to exhibit that famous Aussie competitiveness, Kate Moss is the one to beat. Here’s what she wrote to us in December:
Now before some of you get all cross with me for the self-celebratory tone, let me also say this: We’re not yet where we aim to be.
The Australia bureau is less than a year old and we still have a lot to learn about how to make sure we’re telling the stories — and sharing the stories beyond this continent — that will add value to your routine.
As always, we’re eager to hear from you. If you have a story tip, an investigative lead, or an anecdote for our Australia Diary, email us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
We’re also pushing forward with brainstorming of our own.
I just got back from an annual meeting of New York Times correspondents in the Asia-Pacific region. For three days in Hong Kong, dozens of New York Times journalists huddled together to talk about coverage for the coming year.
We discussed how China is changing under Xi Jinping, what “the China model” actually is, and how it is influencing the world at a time of American retreat.
We discussed the direction of India and Myanmar. We discussed religion and democracy. We talked about suicide in Japan, protests in Iran, how technology is being used to reshape interaction for us all.
We also ate some amazing food. (Peking duck. Lots of it, among other things.)
And of course, we talked about Australia and New Zealand.
Interest in this part of the world seems to be growing. As a result, you can expect more visitors this year and a wider range of coverage.
Truly, The New York Times here and everywhere is an evolving effort. We’re eager to do great work, and eager to engage our (and your) collective curiosity.
So let’s get to it.
Here’s this week’s roundup of stories, plus a recommendation for what to listen to while you enjoy the summer heat.
See you on Twitter and in our NYT Australia Facebook group!
______
A former CIA agent was arrested and charged with helping the Chinese government identify informants inside China — possibly explaining why several informants were killed or imprisoned in a major collapse of the American spy network in China.
President Trump received a perfect score on a test screening for neurological impairment on Tuesday. 
The special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, has subpoenaed the president’s former chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, to testify before a grand jury investigating links between the President Trump’s associates and Russia.
______
To bitcoin or not to bitcoin?
As the price of the behemoth cryptocurrency wavered this week, our reporters dove into the world of virtual currency to examine a tightknit group of friends and enthusiasts who hope to shake up the monetary status quo.
If you’re in the mood for a longer read, check out this feature from our magazine, where one writer explains why blockchain platforms could make not just money, but history.
And have you heard of Ripple, another cryptocurrency that briefly made one of its co-founders richer than Mark Zuckerberg last week?
______
Grab your raquets. These are the players we’re closely watching at this year’s Australian Open. This is where to find our coverage of all the most important moments and back stories.
And remember that whole same-sex marriage thing? We attended one of the first gay weddings for a look at the excitement among vendors who are expecting a boom to the tune of $650 million Australian dollars over the next 12 months.
In this week’s Australia Diary, we gathered a collection of poetry that reflects on moments of beauty in nature.
And Friday means it’s time for another Besha Rodell review. Return here to be the first to read it.
______
• Aziz Ansari Is Guilty. Of Not Being a Mind Reader, writes editor Bari Weiss, after a story detailing a sexual encounter between an anonymous woman and the comedian went public, adding another layer to the #metoo conversation.
• In Hawaii, Readers React to a Missile Attack False Alarm. “Imagine learning that you have only minutes to live. I texted my family that I loved them because the cell service was overloaded and I couldn’t get a call out,” one reader recalled.
• Can a Jew Love France? Alexander Aciman explores the muddled allegiances and yearnings of his French and Jewish heritage.
Via our resident podcast fanatic, Isabella Kwai:
Check out The Heart, a recently-ended podcast from Brooklyn that looks at all the pieces that make up love — it’s unflinchingly honest, frequently touching. While on my leisurely walk to work, I couldn’t stop listening to this episode about a mother and daughter going on a cruise.
