Enough NYPD ‘spying’ histrionics  The police take careful steps with stringent oversight, respecting First and Fourth Amendment rights
   Earlier this month, a terrorist in New Zealand murdered 50 innocent worshipers in two mosques as he live-streamed the atrocity on Facebook. He appears to have been radicalized as a white supremacist through online engagement with hate groups. 
   Last week, critics of the NYPD argued that we ought to make it more difficult for the police to use the latest technology to hunt for terrorists like the attacker in New Zealand. 
   Their arguments repeated common but factually inaccurate critiques on how the NYPD surveillance policy works. And these misleading tropes are being used to justify proposals that will ultimately make New Yorkers less safe because they would reveal specific methods and technologies used in undercover investigations of terrorists, drug dealers and organized crime. 
   Language matters. By substituting words like “spying” for investigation and “surveillance” for viewing public web postings, critics can drive a wedge between police and communities that the NYPD works hard to protect, and undermine our attempts to build trust with them. 
   It is not “surveillance” to read Twitter posts. This information is in the public square, purposely designed to attract the attention of strangers, and therefore warrants no privacy protection whatsoever. It is the equivalent of someone printing a newsletter and distributing it on a streetcorner. The NYPD can view this material, as may any member of the public. In fact, we’d be negligent not to. 
   The Handschu guidelines regulate when the NYPD can investigate political activities that might cross over into criminal acts. They were amended after 9/11 to reflect the changing realities of terrorism in a city where 2,800 people were killed in a single day. 
   Handschu now counts the “possibility of unlawful or terrorist activity” as grounds to open a case but, importantly, only on a limited and preliminary basis. Throughout, the NYPD continues to observe all First Amendment and Fourth Amendment protections, including obtaining judicial warrants for any search or phone surveillance. 
   These critical Handschu guidelines are strictly followed by the NYPD, including in a number of high-profile instances. Black Lives Matter is an important example. Contrary to popular claims, there has been no investigation of the Black Lives Matter movement by the NYPD. There were investigations of specific individuals who threatened violence, and those could only be initiated after being authorized by the Handschu guidelines that a federal judge devised, and the attorneys for protest groups agreed to. 
   The Handschu guidelines are assiduously adhered to regarding telecommunications use as well. The NYPD does not use any devices to jam phones of protesters, and does not use Stingrays to listen to their conversations, read texts or emails or download other data. Technology allows us to locate cell phones — that’s it, and that’s an invaluable tool when scouring an area for a missing person or dangerous criminal perpetrator. 
   The NYPD applies for a court order to use them, which limits their use to single phone in each case, hardly the sweeping dragnet that the critics attempt to portray. 
   Detractors often attempt to conjure an image of the NYPD’s Intelligence Bureau as a shadowy and menacing caricature, riding roughshod over civil liberties and constitutional rights. In reality, the NYPD operates in a highly regulated environment. No investigation begins or continues without rigorous legal scrutiny, including the oversight of the independent civilian observer. 
   Lawyers for civil rights and privacy advocates play an important role in our system but they have an obligation, as we do, to base their arguments on facts. The NYPD’s intelligence investigations are highly regulated and well vetted. We carefully guard the First and Fourth Amendment rights of New Yorkers at the same time we work to protect them from violence and future terrorist attacks. 
   Miller is deputy commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism for the NYPD.   
