‘Egg Boy’ felt ‘empowered’ to break an egg on head of Australian senator
   Things are looking sunny-side up for the Australian teen known as “Egg Boy.” 
   Will Connolly, 17, said he had felt “empowered” to smash a raw egg over the head of an Australian senator, who he felt was “blaming the victims” for the New Zealand shooting massacre. 
   The video of Connolly egging Sen. Fraser Anning and the senator’s ensuing punches, went viral, with many applauding the teen for his bravery. 
   Interviewed by talk show The Project to talk about the incident, Connolly said he had attended Anning’s press conference with good intentions, even though he was “flat-out disgusted” to read the senator’s statement on the Christchurch shooting that left 50 worshipers in two mosques dead. 
   “I went in there to listen to him for an hour, see if he’d change my mind,” Connolly said. 
   After further remarks, however, he felt “empowered” to egg the senator. 
   After the March 16 incident, an anonymous person created a GoFundMe page that was originally to help Connolly with “legal fees” and “more eggs.” 
   It has now raised almost $80,000. “It’s going to help people affected by the tragedy of Christchurch,” Connolly said. “Every cent.” 
   Connolly, who faced some criticism from people who believed he was drawing focus away from the seriousness of the issue, agreed: “It’s blown up completely out of proportion to the point where it’s kind of embarrassing . . . because too much attention is actually brought away from the real victims suffering — we should be focusing on them.” 
   As for the method of his protest, he expressed in an Instagram caption that he doesn’t “condone violence” or “egging someone.” 
   “I understand what I did was not the right thing to do,” he said, adding that his mom felt the same way. “She’s glad I stood up for what I believe in, but she definitely disagrees with the way I did it.” 
   “However, this egg has united people.” 
   Connolly stressed that he isn’t an activist, meaning this act of protest was likely a one-time thing. 
   “I’m officially off the eggs now,” he said. 
