‘Think of the person you love most in life, then assign them a day they’re going to be slaughtered,’ says mom of Pulse nightclub victim who applauds New Zealand ban on assault weapons
   Long before her son was gunned down in a Florida nightclub by a man with a Sig Sauer semiautomatic rifle, Christine Leinonen knew firsthand the scourge of assault weapons. 
   She saw them in her work as a Michigan State Trooper and even won a commendation for her arrest of a Detroit party store owner selling drugs to buy and ship assault rifles overseas. 
   “We knew we had a problem in America, and then we solved it, at least for a little while,” she said Thursday, referring to the 1994 federal assault weapons ban that expired in 2004 with no action, setting the stage for her only child’s death. 
   “After that, it was a geometrical explosion. They started marketing them like candy,” she said. 
   Leinonen and other anguished relatives of mass shooting victims say New Zealand’s swift decision to ban assault rifles just six days after a white supremacist mowed down 50 people in twin mosque massacres ought to be an example for American policymakers. 
   If Congress had simply renewed the 1990s ban before it expired or reinstated it after a gunman used a Bushmaster assault rifle to slaughter 20 children and six adults at Sandy Hook Elementary School in December 2012, their family members would still be alive. 
   “My son wouldn’t have been killed if we’d shown a moral backbone in 2012 and did what New Zealand just did,” Leinonen said, referring to son Christopher (Drew) Leinonen, 32, who died alongside his partner in Orlando’s Pulse nightclub. 
   “If we did that, I would still be happy," she told the Daily News. “Until my son died, I didn’t know how innocent and happy I really was. Now I watch old videos with my son and know my real, true happiness is gone.” 
   Leinonen, 61, called it “ludicrous” that the mass shooters in Orlando, Las Vegas and Parkland, Fla., simply walked into gun stores after Sandy Hook and legally purchased the assault weapons they used to unleash waves of lead on crowds of unsuspecting victims. 
   She called the ability to kill dozens of people in the blink of an eye “too much power" to sell on a store shelf. 
   “This isn’t about the Second Amendment. We already restrict tanks and hand grenades,” she said. 
   “And what the shooters are — a jihadist wannabe, a goose-stepping neo-Nazi, a white supremacist — none of that matters as much as their ability to walk into a gun store and buy these weapons. These are angry men looking for a place to put their hatred, and giving them easy access to these weapons is ludicrous," she said. 
   Leinonen praised New Zealand’s Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern as a “true leader.” 
   “She responded to the problem with swift and sure action. These people were killed with military-style assault weapons? Those weapons are out of here. I love her,” Leinonen said. “I wish she could rescue us too.” 
   Relatives who lost loved ones in Sandy Hook echoed the admiration. They said Ardern’s decisive ban on all semiautomatic and automatic weapons and high-capacity magazines will undoubtedly save lives. 
   Ardern announced the new ban Thursday, ordering gun sellers to immediately halt the sale of all weapons similar to the ones the anti-immigrant shooter used in the mosque rampage he streamed live online. 
   Legislation to enforce the ban is expected to pass by April 11. Ardern’s coalition government controls enough seats in Parliament to ensure implementation. 
   “I’m very happy. It’s amazing. They’re a small country, but hopefully their initiative will have repercussions in the U.S.,” Gilles Rousseau, a former resident of Québec who lost his daughter Lauren Rousseau in the Sandy Hook massacre, said. 
   Rousseau, 73, said he felt “proud” of Ardern’s bold leadership considering his Canadian roots and their shared connection to the British Commonwealth. 
   “I’m just so sick of hearing politicians say they’re keeping victims in their prayers. That’s all you know how to do? We’ve had too many moments of silence. Let’s do something about it,” Rousseau pleaded. 
   “I grew up on a farm. We didn’t need these weapons to protect our farm,” he said. “Here it’s ingrained in people’s lives. People say it’s in their DNA. I say, ‘Get over it.’” 
   Rousseau said he was stunned back in 2013 when the bipartisan gun control measure pushed by Sens. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) and Pat Toomey (R-Pa.) was defeated in Congress just four months after his 30-year-old daughter was slain while working as a substitute teacher. 
   The legislation would have required background checks on all commercial gun sales. The final vote tally was 54 to 46, a solid majority of support but not the 60 votes needed to pass the Senate. 
   “I was so shocked,” Rousseau recalled. “I thought for sure 26 people dying like that, most of them little kids, would have an effect on Congress. But it didn’t.” 
   Bill Sherlach, 61, remembers that day too. He lost his school psychologist wife Mary Sherlach in the Newton, Conn., tragedy and trekked to Washington before the vote to help press for passage. He recalled attending 19 legislative meetings in two days. 
   “We thought the world would change with the shooting at Sandy Hook. It didn’t,” Sherlach told The News. 
   He said in the end, opposition from the National Rifle Association proved too formidable. 
   “If we could get the money away from the NRA, we might have a level playing field here. They refuse to give even one inch because they say another yard is to come,” he said. 
   “I grew up in the country with people who hunted. I have no problem with that. But even hunting has rules and regulations. You have to have a license, you need a certain type of gun. We have all sorts of rules and regulations for Bambi, but if you want to hunt human beings, have at it,” Sherlach said. 
   Now a board member for Sandy Hook Promise, Sherlach cheered New Zealand’s concrete action but said he worries “the differences are too sizable” for anything to happen that fast at the national level in the U.S. Instead, he’s focused on a “town-by-town” approach. 
   Leinonen said her mission these days is to get people to do a thought experiment. 
   “Think of the person you love most in life, then assign them a day they’re going to be slaughtered with an assault rifle,” she said. “If you can grasp how different you will feel the day before and the day after, then we might have a real solution.”   
