   It wasn’t as fast or ambitious as New Zealand, but the United States is imposing a ban that aims to make it harder to carry out deadly shootings. 
   The federal ban on bump stocks takes effect Tuesday, more than a year after the device was used in the deadliest mass shooting in modern U.S. history. Anyone who owns the dangerous gadget, which is now officially designated as a “machine gun," must immediately destroy it or turn it over. 
   Already, though, two groups have challenged the ban at the Supreme Court, filing separate sets of papers on Monday requesting an emergency halt to the measure, according to Bloomberg. 
   The U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives — or ATF — announced the rule in December, giving the public three months to get rid of any “bump-stock-type devices,” which are often used to upgrade the shooting capacity of semiautomatic guns into fully automatic mode. 
   On Oct. 1, 2017, a gunman did just that before he opened fire at a crowd of people at a concert in Las Vegas, killing 58 of them and wounding more than 500. Stephen Paddock, who fired the shots from the window of a nearby hotel room, was armed with 23 AR-style weapons, 14 of which were outfitted with bump stocks. 
   In the immediate aftermath, there were bipartisan calls to ban the gadget, but the proposal went nowhere in what was then a Republican-controlled Congress. The Department of Justice later decided to amend firearm rules, circumventing lawmakers. 
   ATF said law-abiding citizens would not “instantly” become felons under the new rule, but it encouraged people to destroy or abandon their devices to “avoid criminal liability.” It does not appear that a person who accidentally finds a bump stock in their garage months from now or learns about the new rule later this year, for instance, would be in trouble. 
   Matthew Fleming, a spokesman for the bureau’s New York office, said those cases will depend on the “intent” of each individual. 
   “We want to get them off the streets as soon as possible,” he said. 
   ATF estimates that the number of bump stocks held by the public ranges from about 280,000 to 520,000. 
   The bureau could not say how many devices have been turned over so far. An ATF spokeswoman said “abandonments solely to ATF is not an accurate measure” because other law enforcement agencies may also accept such devices at the state or local level. 
   Washington State, for instance, has implemented a buyback program, offering $150 per device, though payment is limited to five devices per person. 
   ATF does not offer a financial incentive for those turning over their bump stocks because federal buyback programs require congressional action, the bureau said. 
   Critics have described the ban as a tiny step into gun regulation — one that dwarfs in comparison to New Zealand’s decision to ban military-style semiautomatic and assault rifles just days after the March 15 mosque shootings in that country. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said the upcoming ban would also include about $200 million for a buyback program. 
   Several American gun-rights groups were not happy with the ATF’s decision. The National Rifle Association has been calling for a period of amnesty and Gun Owners of America filed a lawsuit against the administration. 
   The group takes issue with ATF’s decision to describe bump stocks as machine guns. 
   “So using the ATF’s rationale that a bump stock turns an AR-15 into a machinegun, we noted that the ATF could easily interpret the possession of rubber bands and an AR-15 to be ‘constructive intent’ to convert the semi-auto into a full auto," the group said in a statement Friday. 
   RW Arms, one of the few retailers still selling bump stocks in recent months, had no devices in stock on Monday, according to its website. One bump stock listed on that website had a price of $159.95 and included black and pink models. 
   Another website, GunBroker.com, still had bump stocks being auctioned as of Monday afternoon. 
   ATF said there is no requirement for individuals to report self-destruction or abandonment. 
   Those who believe they know someone who has illegally kept a bump stock can file a complaint with ATF. Fleming said the ban will be enforced just like any machine gun violation. 
   With reporting by Theresa Braine   
