   No one covers the city like the Daily News. For nearly 100 years, New York’s Hometown Newspaper has been your eyes and ears — and your voice. 
   Do you have a story you think we should tell? Call us at (212) 210-NEWS. This is your paper, and we are committed to covering the issues that matter to you. Here are some of our top stories from the last week: 
   Helping the helpers: FDNY Emergency Medical Service workers help those in dire need, but they also look out for their own. In the wake of the 2017 on-duty death of EMT Yadira Arroyo, her colleagues set up the EMS FDNY Help Fund, which has raised tens of thousands of dollars to provide aid for needy families of city paramedics and EMTs. Arroyo was also honored with a plaque at an emergency call box. 
   How low can you go? A charity volunteer stole $410,000 donated by NYPD cops for the families of slain officers, prosecutors charged. Manhattan U.S. Attorney Geoffrey Berman said Lorraine Shanley — herself an NYPD widow — spent the dough on landscaping for her Staten Island home and Barbra Streisand tickets. 
   Get on the (dilapidated) bus: The poorest neighborhoods in Brooklyn, East New York and Brownsville, are saddled with the worst buses in the city, a Daily News analysis shows. After our story appeared, Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams called for an investigation. The city then announced that it would pull all of its 21-year-old, diesel-burning buses from service by May 10. 
   Bad grades in diversity: Mayor de Blasio pledged to better integrate the city’s elite high schools — which are dominated by white and Asian students — but his report card isn’t good. Just 506 black and Hispanic students received offers for the upcoming fall semester, a drop of roughly 4 percent. 
   Moo-ve out of the way: You can find traffic jams at the Major Deegan Expressway for many reasons, but this one was pretty unusual: a calf wandering on the road. NYPD officers managed to get the roaming bovine off the highway safely, and rescuers took the animal — christened Major Deegan — to a rescue shelter in New Jersey. 
   ‘ 
   For more on these stories and many others, visit nydailynews.com.   
