   See ya later, haters. 
   The world’s biggest social network announced a major policy shift Wednesday, banning white nationalist and white separatist content from Facebook and Instagram. 
   The company will begin enforcing the ban next week, blocking any content that praises, supports or represents those ideologies on its platforms. Users who try to post such content will be redirected to an anti-hate nonprofit organization, Life After Hate. 
   “It’s clear that these concepts are deeply linked to organized hate groups and have no place on our services," the company said in a blog post Wednesday. 
   The crackdown comes amid increasing pressure from civil rights groups for Facebook to do more to stop the spread of hate on its platform. 
   A study published last month found that the number of hate groups in the United States has reached a record high. The Southern Poverty Law Center found 1,020 active hate groups in the country, a 7% increase over the 954 recorded in 2017. 
   Facebook’s announcement also comes days after a deadly terrorist attack against two mosques in New Zealand. The shooter, Brenton Tarrant, live-streamed 17 minutes of the March 15 attack on Facebook. 
   The move even sparked a lawsuit against the company by the French Council of the Muslim Faith, which accused Facebook this week of “broadcasting a message with violent content abetting terrorism, or of a nature likely to seriously violate human dignity and liable to be seen by a minor." 
   Facebook, which acknowledged it needs to get better and faster at removing hate content from its platforms, said Wednesday its decision expands an existing ban on white supremacy. The newly blocked expressions weren’t included in the original ban because the company saw them as “broader concepts of nationalism and separatism — things like American pride and Basque separatism, which are an important part of people’s identity." 
   The company said it met with experts in race relations over the past three months and learned that white separatism and white nationalism “cannot be meaningfully separated from white supremacy and organized hate groups.” 
   “Going forward, while people will still be able to demonstrate pride in their ethnic heritage, we will not tolerate praise or support for white nationalism and separatism,” the company’s statement said. 
   Life After Hate, which will likely see a major traffic increase in the days ahead, was founded in 2011 by former violent extremists. It provides crisis intervention, education and support groups to help people leave hateful ideologies.   
