VIDEO  Michigan Rep. Rashida Tlaib breaks down during congressional hearing on white supremacy
   Democratic congresswoman Rashida Tlaib brought down the house with an emotional plea to FBI counterterrorism assistant director Michael McGarrity and her fellow representatives to push for a domestic terrorism statute that would help protect Muslims such as herself. 
   The freshman Michigan representative grew shaky and sobbed as she read a hateful email addressed to herself and fellow “rag head” congresswoman Ilan Omar of Minnesota, as well as New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The angry missive, which Tlaib read nearly two hours and 25 minutes into Tuesday’s House Oversight hearing on Confronting White Supremacy, followed the mass shooting at a mosque in Christchurch, New Zealand that left 51 people dead. 
   “I was totally excited and pleased when I heard that about 49 Muslims were killed and many more were wounded in new Zealand,” she read, fighting off tears. “This is a great start. Let’s hope and pray that it continued here in the good old USA. The only good Muslim is a dead one.” 
   Tlaib asked McGarrity why, under the current rule of law, that sort of threat doesn’t merit more attention. 
   “How is that not enough to fall under domestic terrorism?” she asked. “We get so many of these and I keep asking what happens what happens to these individuals. I’m a mother and I want to go home to my two boys.” 
   The FBI bigwig said that there are laws that could apply to the person who harassed Tlaib and her fellow congresswoman — particularly if a threat had been made. McGarrity, who’d earlier made clear that new statutes were outside his jurisdiction, said he was willing to further discuss the subject. 
   Punctuating her point, Tlaib noted the president, the Department of Justice and the Office of Homeland Security were copied on the letter she’d just read. Tlaib then spoke about her experiences with discrimination as a lawyer before finishing her elocution by apologizing to committee chairman Jamie Raskin for going over her allotted five minutes of floor time. 
   “I was so mesmerized by your statement that I lost track of time there, so that was my fault,” Raskin said.   
