SEE IT  Realtor pays for billboard encouraging LeBron James to stay in Cleveland 
   Cavs fans want to remind LeBron James there's no place like home. 
   With fans from cities like Los Angeles and Philadelphia using billboards in an attempt to lure LeBron to the Lakers or 76ers, a Cavaliers fan had one put up in Akron asking the four-time NBA MVP to stay in Ohio. 
   Alison McIntyre Baranek, a realtor from LeBron's hometown, paid for the billboard that reads: "LeBron, there's no place like home. #ThisIsHome." 
   The billboard, which is a nod to "The Wizard of Oz," is complete with a photo of two ruby red sneakers. 
   Baranek told Cleveland.com she got the billboard on behalf of all Cavaliers fans from Akron. 
   "It just seems right to reach out to him and let him know we want him to stay, to show him some hometown love," Baranek told the newspaper. "He does so much for our community, especially the kids. Akron is so much better with him here." 
   She said paying for the billboard was expensive, but says it's worth it to let LeBron know how much Akron cares for him. 
   A second billboard is expected to go up before the end of March, the newspaper reported. 
   LeBron hasn't seen the Akron billboard yet, but he seems honored by what he's seeing from his hometown. 
   "It's very flattering," LeBron said, per Cleveland.com. "It's very humbling. I know my hometown, so, I already know there's no place like Akron, that's for sure." 
   Recruiting LeBron by using a billboard has quickly become a craze that has even reached other countries. 
   The New Zealand Breakers, who compete in the National Basketball League in Australia, put up a billboard asking the NBA superstar to consider a change of continent. 
   The team tweeted that LeBron could even ask Oklahoma City Thunder star Steven Adams for a tour of the country. 
   With many cities requesting LeBron to come to town, it remains unclear what he will do when free agency arrives this summer. 
   - With The Associated Press   
