SYDNEY, Australia — James Packer, a colorful Australian billionaire who has found himself embroiled in a corruption scandal involving Israel’s prime minister, has resigned as a director of Crown Resorts, the casino company that is a source of much of his wealth.
In a statement, Crown cited “personal reasons” for his departure without giving further details. But Consolidated Press Holdings, an investment company owned and controlled by Mr. Packer, said in a statement that “Mr. Packer is suffering from mental health issues.”
“At this time,” the company said, “he intends to step back from all commitments.”
Mr. Packer is one of Australia’s richest men, a globe-trotting billionaire who had been engaged to Mariah Carey, formed a film-production company with Brett Ratner in Hollywood — and most recently became entangled in a corruption investigation involving Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel.
According to the police in Israel, expensive cigars, jewelry and pink champagne flowed into the prime minister’s official Jerusalem residence — and one of the patrons was Mr. Packer, who has said he was only giving Mr. Netanyahu what he demanded.
The case is still under investigation.
Recently, Mr. Packer has been shedding assets. In December, Crown sold a vacant Las Vegas lot where it had intended to build a major casino. A month ago, Mr. Packer sold off more than 100 million Australian dollars, about $75 million American, of his own shares in Crown.
After that sale, his remaining stake was valued at more than 4 billion Australian dollars.
Mr. Packer, 50, owns about 47 percent of Crown, the biggest listed casino company outside China, via Consolidated Press Holdings.
Crown has recently been hit by allegations that poker machines were fixed and problem gambling was encouraged at its casino in Melbourne. It has denied the allegations.
The company was also named in a class-action lawsuit in December that claimed it did not properly disclose to shareholders the activities that resulted in the arrests of several staff members and an almost 15-percent decline in its share price.
Chinese authorities detained the China-based employees of Crown Resorts, also one of Australia’s largest hotel operators, in 2016 on suspicion of committing “gambling crimes.” Among those held was Jason O’Connor, who oversaw the company’s efforts to attract wealthy players.
Their detention sent shivers through the casino industry, raising fears that the Chinese government would seek harsh penalties against overseas operators. The crackdown also prompted unease in Australia, where concerns about the nation’s economic dependence on China have grown.
In June, a court in Shanghai sentenced three Australian employees to less than a year in prison each on charges of illegally promoting gambling in China. Thirteen other employees, one Malaysian and 12 Chinese, received similar sentences, Crown said.
Mr. Packer was the son of the media mogul Kerry Packer, who became Australia’s richest man by turning a magazine and television inheritance worth millions into a diverse business worth billions. The elder Mr. Packer, who died in 2005, was compared to the Australian-born publisher Rupert Murdoch.
