Four in France, Including 16-Year-Old Girl, Are Held in Bomb Plot
PARIS — Four people, including a 16-year-old girl, who were believed to be preparing a terrorist attack were arrested in southern France on Friday after bomb-making materials were found in the home of one of the detainees, according to the Paris prosecutor’s office.
The three other people taken into custody near the city of Montpellier were men, ages 20, 26 and 33, said Agnès Thibault-Lecuivre, a spokeswoman for the prosecutor’s office, but no other information about the four was released.
The arrests highlighted the danger posed to France, which has been the site of several deadly attacks in the past two years and is thought to be the most targeted country in Europe.
“We are facing an extremely high level of threat,” Prime Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said in an interview with the BFM TV news channel, although he did not comment specifically on the arrests.
In a statement, the Interior Ministry said that the police operation was preceded by a two-week investigation led by the antiterrorism section of the Paris prosecutor’s office and that an attack had been “imminent.” Ms. Thibault-Lecuivre said, however, that the authorities “do not know where nor how” it was to be carried out.
Three of the people taken into custody were “directly suspected of preparing a violent act on our territory,” the interior minister, Bruno Le Roux, said in the statement.
The prosecutor’s office said that the police who searched the 20-year-old’s home found 70 grams of TATP, or triacetone triperoxide, a peroxide-based explosive that was used by the Islamic State in attacks in Paris and Brussels.
Ms. Agnès Thibault-Lecuivre said that police officers had also discovered ingredients that could have been used to produce more TATP, including a liter, or just over a quart, of acetone, a liter of hydrogen peroxide and a liter of sulfuric acid.
Although officials noted the serious nature of the threat posed by the thwarted plot, the amount of chemicals found on Tuesday was a small fraction of the amount found in a Brussels apartment shortly after deadly attacks in the Belgian capital last March.
Investigators in Brussels found 30 pounds of TATP in one apartment and ingredients to make much more, along with 40 gallons of acetone and eight gallons of hydrogen peroxide. TATP is so unstable that even a small amount can cause a significant explosion.
France is under a state of emergency that was declared after the November 2015 attacks in and around Paris that left 130 people dead, and the country has been consistently on edge. This month, a man wielding two large knives was shot in Paris after he attacked a military patrol near the Louvre Museum.
The prosecutor’s office said on Friday evening that the man, who remained hospitalized, had been placed under formal investigation on terrorism charges, including attempted murder and criminal conspiracy.
Parliament sought to further bolster security last year by passing a series of measures that gave the judicial and police authorities more powers in dealing with terrorism suspects, but the government suffered a setback on Friday when France’s top constitutional court struck down one of the new provisions.
The court, the Constitutional Council, which ensures that legislation conforms to the French Constitution, found that a provision that made it a crime to regularly consult websites that promote terrorism disproportionately violated the freedom of communication.
The court ruled that existing legislation was sufficient to counter terrorist propaganda online. The provision had subjected offenders to a prison sentence as long as two years and a fine of up to 30,000 euros, or about $33,500.
The French authorities regularly uncover plots to carry out attacks. Mr. Le Roux told lawmakers in December that 13 attempts to commit terrorist attacks had been thwarted over a five-month period.
Mr. Le Roux said the plots had involved more than 30 people, including women and minors, stressing that this amounted to a “very striking evolution in the course of the recent months” and that “the whole national territory is being targeted.”
The plots included a thwarted effort in September, when security forces disrupted a group of radicalized young women who planned to set off an explosion near the Cathedral of Notre-Dame in Paris using a car stuffed with gas canisters.
Two months later, the French authorities said that five people who had been taken into custody were Islamic State operatives being directed by a commander in Iraq or Syria, and that they were planning an “imminent” attack.
On Friday, there were also reports in the French news media that a prolific terrorism planner for the Islamic State, identified as Rachid Kassim, had been killed in an American airstrike near Mosul, Iraq. A press officer at the Pentagon, Maj. Adrian J. T. Rankine-Galloway, confirmed only that coalition forces had targeted Mr. Kassim and were assessing the results of the strike.
Mr. Kassim, a French citizen thought to be in his late 20s, has been described by counterterrorism officials and analysts as one of the group’s most dangerous “virtual planners” who spurred attacks that focused on targets in France. French-speaking recruits for the terrorist group flocked to his Telegram channel, the messaging app that has become the go-to service for the jihadists, where Mr. Kassim posted a steady diet of audio diaries, inciting his followers in France to attack. According to French investigative documents, he helped organize the attack by two young men, Adel Kermiche and Abdel Malik Nabil, before they burst into the St.-Étienne-du-Rouvray church and cut the throat of its priest. Officials also believe he had a role in several other attacks or plots, including possibly the stabbing of a French police officer and his girlfriend last summer.
