Tehran Mayor Quits Race for Iran Presidency
TEHRAN — One of the leading hard-line candidates for Iran’s presidency withdrew from the race on Monday, in a move aimed at consolidating the conservative vote ahead of Friday’s election.
The candidate, Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf, the mayor of Tehran, threw his support behind Ebrahim Raisi, a former top official of the judiciary, who is seen as the main threat to the moderate incumbent, President Hassan Rouhani.
Recent polls have put the combined support for the two conservative candidates at just over 50 percent, with Mr. Rouhani at around 42 percent. That is not to say, however, that all of Mr. Qalibaf’s supporters will automatically vote for Mr. Raisi.
In suspending his campaign, the third unsuccessful run he has made at the presidency, Mr. Qalibaf released a statement calling the Rouhani camp of moderates and reformists “pseudorevolutionaries” who are “consuming the roots of the revolution like termites.”
The denunciation was in keeping with the bitter tone of a campaign in which the candidates have characterized one another as corrupt, liars and enemies of the revolution.
Mr. Qalibaf had been under pressure from fellow hard-liners to fall in behind Mr. Raisi. Two other minor candidates are expected to withdraw before Friday, making the race a showdown between Mr. Raisi and Mr. Rouhani, clerics who hold strongly opposing views of Iran’s future.
Mr. Rouhani said on Monday that he needed a strong victory to gain the mandate to carry out changes leading to more personal freedoms, something he promised in his first campaign but was never able to deliver.
“The leverage of my power does not possess some things, but some things will be possible with a vote of more than 51 percent,” he said during a campaign stop in western Iran.
By contrast, Mr. Raisi has promised that, if elected, he will ensure that the nation becomes more self-sufficient and establishes relations with other countries only “when in the interests of Iran.”
His supporters often call Mr. Rouhani’s political team “traitors” for making the nuclear agreement with the United States and other world powers. Mr. Raisi himself has taken the president to task for saying the nuclear deal has prevented war, calling it “a disgraceful sign of weakness.”
