Year After Rohingya Massacres, Top Generals Unrepentant and Unpunished
MYIN HLUT, Myanmar — On the eve of the anniversary of a military-led ethnic-cleansing campaign against Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar, the nation’s commander in chief, Sen. Gen. Min Aung Hlaing, was in Russia on an arms-buying expedition.
Starting a year ago, more than 700,000 Rohingya began fleeing Myanmar to neighboring Bangladesh amid a frenzy of massacre, rape and arson by soldiers and Buddhist mobs — acts of violence that have been widely documented.
[Read here an account of how a civilian Rakhine town administrator conducted a campaign of torture and abuse of his Rohingya constituents for years before leading soldiers in a massacre.]
Yet since then, General Min Aung Hlaing and Myanmar’s other leaders have escaped international legal censure. And they are maintaining a campaign of denial and avoidance, as well as jailing and intimidating reporters who have documented the attacks.
On Tuesday, while Myanmar’s commander in chief was shopping for weaponry in Russia, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the country’s de facto civilian leader, gave a speech in Singapore in which she made no mention of the bloodletting by the nation’s armed forces. Thousands of Rohingya are believed to have been killed in northern Rakhine State.
United Nations officials have raised the prospect that the violence could be considered genocide, and officials at the United States State Department have debated using the term, according to American diplomats.
But Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, blamed “terrorist activities, which was the initial cause of events leading to the humanitarian crisis in Rakhine.”
On Aug. 25, 2017, Rohingya militants, mostly armed with makeshift weapons, carried out strikes on police posts and an army station in northern Rakhine, killing a dozen security forces. Myanmar’s military, which is known as the Tatmadaw, says that its actions were “clearance operations,” in response to the Rohingya raids.
But human rights groups have documented how the nation’s military dispatched truckloads of soldiers to northern Rakhine even in the weeks before the Aug. 25 insurgent strike.
In a question-and-answer session after her lecture in Singapore, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, whose father founded Myanmar’s modern army, said that she found the generals in her cabinet to be “rather sweet.”
Sidestepping a question about the safety concerns that Rohingya sheltering in Bangladesh had about returning home, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi focused on Rakhine’s tourism potential, calling the state “the most beautiful region in Myanmar.”
“All of the foreigners I have ever met frequently told me that the beaches in Rakhine State are more attractive than those across the world,” she said.
The United States, Canada and the European Union have placed targeted sanctions on Myanmar military officers believed to have directed the violence against the largely stateless Rohingya last year. But General Min Aung Hlaing and other top brass were spared.
Others are pushing for Myanmar to be formally investigated for war crimes. On Friday, a group of 132 Southeast Asian lawmakers called on the United Nations Security Council to refer Myanmar to the International Criminal Court, which rule
