The Knicks’ Kevin Durant dream could become a Nets nightmare
   The dream for the Knicks and the nightmare both involve the exact same scenario: 
   Kevin Durant coming to New York. 
   The dream scenario, for sure, is that Durant ends up on 33rd Street, ends up a Knick. In the process, he becomes as great a basketball talent as the Knicks have ever had, even though they will be paying him about $40 million not to play basketball next season due to a ruptured Achilles tendon. 
   The nightmare scenario is that Durant comes to Brooklyn to play for the Nets. In the whole grand scheme of things for James L. Dolan, this becomes a bigger calamity for his basketball team than Phil Jackson. Because here’s something neither Dolan nor anybody else in the permanent government at Madison Square Garden could possibly have considered before the last basketball season began: 
   The Nets, who are supposed to be the Other Team in the big city, are in play for Durant or Kyrie Irving or any other big-ticket free agent. 
   And, by the way? If Durant does decide to leave Golden State, and is strictly making a basketball decision about whether Barclays Center or the Garden is a better landing spot, it’s not even close right now between the Nets and Knicks. The Nets are already a playoff team. They have a better general manager in Sean Marks. They have a better coach in Kenny Atkinson, who did one of the best coaching jobs in the NBA last season. 
   Marks, who’s a 6-10 former player from New Zealand, took the Nets job in 2016, after the team had been ravaged by terrible deals and trading a generation of draft choices to the Celtics, and in the third year of his contract Marks had his team in the playoffs. Meaning he was reconstructing the Nets at the same time Phil Jackson, one of the worst executives in all of Garden history (which is saying plenty), was still in the process of deconstructing the New York Knicks. 
   Do the Nets have a legitimate shot at Durant? You always go back to the Hollywood wisdom of the great William Goldman on this one: Nobody knows anything as free agency is about to begin. Nobody knows anything about him, nobody knows what Kawhi Leonard might do, or any of the other guys. Well, maybe Woj knows at ESPN. But this is the fun of the thing. 
   It is no fun at all for the Knicks thinking that Durant may take a hard pass on them the way just about all high-profile free agents always have. Carmelo Anthony, bless his heart, re-signed with them after coming here in a trade from Denver. The only reason Amar’e Stoudemire signed with them as a free agent is because they guaranteed his money despite his knees, and wildly overpaid him in the process. 
   But they still have to go hard after Durant, to the end. They are desperate to have a star like him, even if they do have to wait. And since the Knicks are always selling seasons other than the season they’re playing, Durant really would be a dream guy for them. The 2019-20 season would be another when they won’t be expected to win anything. But then that is the shell game they’ve been running at the Garden for quite some time, during the 19-year period when they have managed to win exactly one playoff series and lost more games than any other team in their sport. 
   “I think we’re asking [Knicks fans] to be more patient,” Knicks’ team president Steve Mills said the other day. 
   That is what the Knicks are constantly selling. They sell patience. They sell the future. They sell whatever their current plan is, before moving on to the next plan. Once they were clearing cap space for LeBron. Now they’ve cleared cap space for Durant, or Kawhi Leonard. Or someone. Never has a team this prominent had as much trouble giving its money away. 
   The Knicks always think big, you bet. The Knicks are a great big value, despite being the worst sports product in New York City, whole seasons that resemble that bottom-of-the-9th that Edwin Diaz gave the Mets in Philly the other day. But they continue to do mean, chowderheaded, small-minded things that are almost breathtaking, like excluding the Daily News from the press availability for RJ Barrett and Ignas Brazdeikis, right after all the great draft-night excitement when the Knicks took Barrett with the third pick and Knicks fans nearly wanted to carry the kid around Barclays Center on their shoulders. 
   In a statement issued after they got themselves fined $50,000 by the league, the Knicks said they made an “error” in thinking it was an invite-only event. It is the Knicks who are the error, for a long time. In one era after another at Madison Square Garden. Now they try to change things with Kevin Durant. Chasing a new dream at the Garden. Hoping the guy doesn’t accept an invite on the other side of the East River. 
   It is impossible to believe that Mickey Callaway will be the manager of the Mets by the beginning of next season, or even the end of next month. 
   But it was Bill Parcells who once said, and famously, that you are what your record says you are. 
   And if you apply that thinking to the Mets right now, Callaway isn’t having nearly as bad a season as his new boss Brodie Van Wagenen is. 
   This isn’t about what anybody thought or hoped might happen when Van Wagenen got the job, then turned around and traded for Robinson Cano and Edwin Diaz. 
   This is about what has happened since then. 
   And on a 1-to-10 disaster scale, the trade with the Mariners is currently about an 18. 
   Messi used to be my favorite soccer player. 
   Pretty sure it’s Megan Rapinoe now. 
   And not just for her ability to score goals. 
   When Beto O’Rourke beat Cory Booker to speaking Spanish in the first debate on Wednesday night, the look on Booker’s face reminded you of a Mets fan watching the bullpen door open. 
   Sen. Lindsey Graham, tame senator from South Carolina, tweeted that he thought the first debate was boring. 
   What, not enough lying? 
   Sit, Senator. 
   Good boy. 
   If you’re good enough to hit .340 or .350, as Jeff McNeil is, you’re good enough to be an All-Star. 
   Kevin Durant. Kawhi Leonard. Kyrie Irving, Kemba Walker, Klay Thompson — I’m thinking there hasn’t been a K Korner like this since 1985 at old Shea. 
   If the Democrats want to reelect Donald Trump, by all means keep putting ten candidates on stage and having the whole thing sound like people yelling over each other like they’re trying to be heard at the deli counter. 
   The whole thing is dumber than NRATV. 
   Well, you know, when there still was an NRATV, before those mutts were taken off the air for good. 
   When the Mets left town the Phillies manager, Gabe Kapler, must have felt like a puppy on the verge of dying of heartbreak. 
   Red Sox fans must have watched Mets relievers this week and thought, wait a second, there’s a bullpen worse than ours this season? 
   Man, if you haven’t read Stephen Mack Jones’ Detroit crime novels about an ex-cop named August Snow, you ought to. 
   And if you still haven’t yet read Joe Ide’s three brilliant books about a Long Beach detective named Isaiah Quintabe, run to the closest bookstore today. 
   Giancarlo Stanton, when healthy, is a designated hitter impersonating an outfielder. 
   I’m just surprised he got hurt again on the bases, and not in left field. 
   Since we got Fed vs. Rafa in the semis at the French Open, why not at Wimbledon? 
   Incidentally: If Nadal could ever win Wimbledon, that would put him at 19 majors, one behind Fed’s 20. 
   Jacob deGrom, Noah Syndergaard, Zack Wheeler, Steven Matz have a combined won-loss record of 20-21, and the only one with an earned run average under 4.50 is deGrom. 
   So it’s not as if they don’t get some of the blame, too. 
   A two-year, $24 million contract for DJ LeMahieu turns out to be one of the best free-agent signings Brian Cashman has ever made. 
   He’s a guy from out of town who’s done just fine in this one. 
   The last playoff game the football Giants won was the second Super Bowl against the Patriots, in Indy, on the first Sunday in February seven years ago. 
   Even making the playoffs under Ben McAdoo that time — that was the week when Odell Beckham Jr. became a seafaring man — they are pretty much in the same kind of cycle as the Los Angeles Lakers. 
   What internal polling is Bill de Blasio looking at that tells him he has a path to the Democratic nomination? 
   I’m watching Marianne Williamson on that stage the other night and thinking they may have to start running these debates like “The Voice.” 
   You know, where you don’t make the show unless you can actually sing? 
   Trump and Putin talking about fake news is like porn for them.   
