Australia Diary is a weekly collection of reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. Share yours with us. For more information, see our first installment.
This week’s entry is by an American who was touched by the kindness of Australian strangers after her friend died unexpectedly.
Three years ago, a man in Sydney responded to some poems of mine he found online. We wrote back and forth and soon became fast friends.
After many Skype sessions and heart-to-heart conversations, Andrew invited me to visit him. I had airline miles to use that would get me there from California. And Andrew offered to pay for me to stay at an Airbnb nearby, an expense he could barely afford.
We made plans to go to the Great Barrier Reef. In the meantime he wandered the neighborhoods of his city, sending me photos of leafy avenues and stunning architecture.
And then. He died. Just like that. A heart attack.
I actually found out on Facebook when I saw a photo of him someone had posted. I was heartbroken, in shock.
I postponed my trip until I felt I could face landing in Sydney without Andrew there. Two of his friends, with whom I had connected online, agreed to meet me. One, Mary, offered to come from Canberra. The other, Yantra, invited us to the Central Coast where we could have a small ceremony to honor Andrew.
I was all packed to come last year when fate intervened. Two acute physical injuries had me immobilized. On the day of my planned departure, I woke in excruciating pain. I emailed the Airbnb host, telling her to please keep the down payment as it would only go back to Andrew’s card.
To my surprise, the host wrote back saying she would save the apartment for me for the following year.
Honestly, I’d been thinking maybe Australia wasn’t meant to be. And yet, one year later, here I am, snuggled in this bright apartment overlooking the harbor.
The sun is glittering on the water, as I wait for Mary to arrive on the ferry with Andrew’s ashes, like tears of love that appear and dissolve and reappear, even more beautiful the second time. 
