New Zealand businessman convicted on charges of sharing mosque massacre livestream faces up to 14 years in prison
   A New Zealand businessman previously fined for sending a box containing a pig’s head to a Christchurch mosque is facing up to 14 years behind bars after he confessed to sharing the horrifying video recorded by a gunman as he opened fire inside the same house of worship last month. 
   Phillip Neville Arps on Thursday was convicted on two counts of distributing the Christchurch Mosque Massacre footage, recorded from the perspective of the shooter as he gunned down 41 worshipers on March 15 at the Al Noor mosque. 
   Prosecutors accused the 44-year-old businessman of sending raw footage of the attack to an unknown individual and then requesting that the person edit in crosshairs and a kill count. From there, he forwarded the chilling clip, unedited, to another 30 people. 
   The shooter, later identified as Australia native Brenton Tarrant, strapped a camera onto his helmet and livestreamed his attack on the Al Noor Mosque to Facebook. The 17-minute video remained on the social media site for nearly a half hour before it was flagged. 
   It was eventually scrubbed from the platform, but not before it was copied and shared across the internet. 
   From the Al Noor mosque, authorities said Tarrant drove three miles away and opened fire inside a mosque in Linwood, where seven more people were killed. Another two people struck by gunfire also later died at area hospitals. 
   In wake of the shooting, one of the deadliest ever to hit New Zealand, the nation’s Chief Censor David Shanks banned both the Facebook livestream video and a manifesto penned by the accused gunman, which spouted white supremacist and anti-Muslim rhetoric. 
   Six people have so far been charged since Shanks made it illegal to view, possess or distribute either item in New Zealand. 
   An 18-year-old in March was also charged with sharing both the video and an image from the massacre, which featured the words “target acquired.” He’s slated to reappear in court in July. 
   Arps was charged and jailed the same month, and a judge ordered this week that he remain behind bars until he’s sentenced on June 14. 
   According to the New Zealand Herald, Arps was also convicted on a charge of offensive behavior in 2016 for recording himself and group of men outside the Al Noor Mosque while performing the Nazi salute. They also reportedly delivered boxes of pig heads to the house of worship. 
   Arps was fined $800 in the case. 
   With News Wire Services   
