   Brooklyn: The article on the proposed NESE Williams pipeline presents a short-sighted and unfortunate position (“NYCHA tenant leader joins push for controversial natural gas pipeline across New York Harbor,” April 17). NYCHA residents suffer unfairly and unconscionably due to lack of safe, affordable and functional energy to heat their apartments in the winter. That is due to a lack of repairs and astonishing neglect over the last several decades. NYCHA’s heating problems are not due to a lack of gas. 
   The proposed pipeline will be in extremely vulnerable places — all places that were particularly affected by Superstorm Sandy. With pipelines leaking all across the U.S., why would we want to jeopardize New York Harbor with potential toxins? All the recent climate reports agree that we must move toward 100% renewable energy ASAP. Why invest money in a dying system of fossil fuels and lock ourselves into more climate disaster? 
   NYCHA should be the first government buildings to get solar panels. New heating and cooling systems need to replace the old ones in NYCHA so why not start with what we need now and in the future and not pour good money after bad by investing in a dying technology? Nancy Romer 
   Staten Island: Once again the Daily News continues the “infamously segregated” attack on the shining stars of a failing system rather than address the ineptitude that limits the horizons of so many of our public school students (“ ‘Test is problem’,” April 21). The highly diverse student bodies at these selective high schools were chosen by a rigorous, fair and culturally blind testing process. That schools Chancellor Richard Carranza “doesn’t want to make the system better” is a telling indictment. After spending three quarters of a billion dollars, he admits the Renewal Schools program is not a success. The only positives he can point to concern transportation, food issues and the symbolic but educationally nebulous Student Voice Manager. Matt Welch’s “Diversity experiment guinea pigs” Op-Ed in the same edition confirms that improved education is far down the ladder of priorities for this commissioner and the mayor. John M. Gaw 
   Margate, Fla.: Richard Cohen sugarcoats the amoral history of Paul Robeson (“Kate Smith and America’s racist past,” column, April 23). When given an opportunity to speak up in defense of Jewish friends of his who were about to be executed by Stalin because they were Jews, Robeson kept silent. It was more important for Robeson to protect the mass murderer Stalin than speak up for the civil rights of his Jewish friends. He embraced the murderous evil of communism and looked the other way while his Jewish friends were murdered. Get real, Mr. Cohen. That is the real Paul Robeson. Richard Sherman 
   Copiague, L.I.: I second Voicer Leigh Block’s warning. On primary day in 2018, I monitored several political action pages to troubleshoot voting issues, and I lost track of how many times I had to explain to people that their votes were not “being suppressed” for devious reasons. When they registered independent, they waived their right to vote in primaries. Those same people later complained that they didn’t like the candidates selected by those who did not give up their primary vote in a petulant miff of “teaching the party a lesson.” Perhaps the voter registration form needs to state in bold print directly under “No party,” that if you don’t choose a party, you can’t vote in a primary. Karen Meyer Campbell 
   Bronx: From the beginning, our United States of America has been founded on good decisions, bad decisions, and a whole lot in the middle. In 2016, we made a really bad decision in the Trump experiment. Let’s cut our loses on how we are perceived at home and abroad. We must get back on track and remember the values and ideals that make us better than the rest. Mark Benveniste 
   Cincinnati: I am composing music for the impeachment of President Trump. My initial inclination was to write a tone poem conveying anger and resentment that he has brought our great country to this pass, but the extent of the national trauma he has induced necessitates a much weightier work, in fact, a full-length opera entitled “A Very Stable Genius.” The libretto traces a narrative of braggadocio and deception to beat the band — yes, I will include some band music in the score along with carnival tunes denoting his three-ring circus. But the greater theme, one symbolized musically with discordance and cacophony, is how he has debased the honor and traditions of our republic. I have instructed the musicians to play these latter passages with furious abandon and have annotated the score with physical gestures such as fist pumps and vocalizations of disgust. I am still composing a few arias, including the title one, “A Very Stable Genius”, and others such as “Sessions’ Lament,”and “Boy, Am I F**ked,” the latter with a doo-wop chorus and finger-snapping beat. Will any of this top the charts? Stay tuned (no pun intended). Paul Bloustein 
   Brooklyn: I am truly shocked and appalled at the lack of reporting on the horrific terror attacks in Sri Lanka. What is going on? How is this not the top story? Or barely even a story? There is barely anything in the Daily News about this at all. What is going on? Christine Rivela 
   Jamaica: Saturday’s front page stated “Twenty Years of Tears: Columbine was only the first of America’s gun horrors and nothing has changed” (April 20). That is so true. America may even have another 20 years because the federal government won’t do anything. Yes, it’s true some states have tougher gun laws but the federal government needs to pass a law. The Republicans and Trump are protecting the NRA. They don’t care about our children or people in general. New Zealand had a mosque gun shooting and they passed new gun laws in a few days. Why can’t we ban semi-automatic weapons? We need new gun laws now! We don’t need any more prayers and deepest sympathy from the federal government. We need tougher laws on the books permanently. New gun laws now! Charlene Black 
   Brooklyn: Mayor de Blasio is certainly, by definition, a hypocrite for touting the Green New Deal and taking a daily entourage of cars to the YMCA in Park Slope. Do the right thing Mr. Mayor! William Thurlow 
   Bronx: Please explain why you have the TV guide at the back of your paper from Monday to Saturday, yet on Sunday one has to search for the TV guide. Why is it not also on the back pages of the paper? Juanita M. Johnson 
   Rego Park: Noticing that someone dug up a song that Kate Smith sang 80 years ago which, to some, contains interpretative offensive lyrics. It appears that no matter the context, “anything you say or do, can and will be used against you” period! God help us all! Tom Heinrich   
