RIO DE JANEIRO — Michel Temer, the deeply unpopular president of Brazil, signaled that he intends to seek a full term in October’s election, telling a newsmagazine in an interview published this weekend that “it would be cowardly not to be a candidate.”
Mr. Temer took office in mid-2016 after helping lead the impeachment of President Dilma Rousseff, for whom he served as vice president. But Mr. Temer, 77, a veteran politician of the center-right, has had a tumultuous presidency, spending much of the past year fending off criminal charges of corruption and obstruction of justice.
Winning a new term would allow Mr. Temer to maintain the special legal standing afforded to senior government officials, which has so far shielded him from trial. On two occasions last year, Congress voted to protect him from facing charges before the Supreme Court.
Mr. Temer had said as recently as last month that he did not intend to run. But in this weekend’s interview with the newsmagazine Istoé, Mr. Temer said that he came to believe that he needed to defend his legacy.
“I’ve fixed a country that was broken,” said Mr. Temer, who leads the Brazilian Democratic Movement party. “I’m proud of what I’ve done and I need to show what’s being done. If I’m not in the fray, what’s going to happen is that all the candidates will go after me.”
In the interview, Mr. Temer argued that he hadn’t been given credit for the country’s advancements since he took office in August 2016. The economy grew 1 percent last year, after shrinking almost 8 percent between 2015 and 2016.
But Mr. Temer’s agenda, which has included an overhaul of labor laws that has weakened unions, has led critics to charge that he has usurped the will of voters who elected Ms. Rousseff, a leftist.
And the horse trading that spared him from prosecution last year also turned him into a vilified figured. Brasília, the capital, is plastered with graffiti that says “Fora Temer,” or “Out With Temer.” A prominent samba school depicted him as a vampire in Rio de Janeiro’s carnival last month.
In polls, Mr. Temer’s approval ratings have been mired in the single digits for many months.
Mr. Temer’s remarks are the latest development in a volatile race. The front-runner, former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, appears likely to go to jail before he can formally register his candidacy, as a result of a corruption conviction handed down last year.
Jair Bolsonaro, a far-right lawmaker regarded as a fringe politician until recently, is running second in the polls.
Prominent allies of Mr. Temer are also considering candidacies. They include Finance Minister Henrique Meirelles and House Speaker Rodrigo Maia, a key supporter of the president in Congress. Mr. Temer’s bid may complicate efforts of centrist parties to coalesce around a candidate.
Fábio Wanderley Reis, a political scientist at the Federal University of Minas Gerais, said the president had little to lose by running. “I think this is an attempt to crawl out of the hole,” he said. “He is calculating that there is no danger that things can get any worse for him.”
Allies of Mr. Temer had previously suggested that he would seek a high-ranking government position like an ambassadorship after leaving the presidency, as a way to retain his legal protection.
Alberto Carlos Almeida, a political scientist who runs a polling organization, said that Mr. Temer may yet backtrack on his intention to run. The deadline to register a candidacy is August.
“I think he is doing this to discourage candidacies from inside the government, or close to the government,” Mr. Almeida said. “It’s better to keep people close to the government than acting critically towards the government.”
Mr. Temer’s remarks came about a month after he made a sudden decision to put the military in charge of security in Rio de Janeiro State, a step that critics called a political gimmick. While Rio de Janeiro has faced months of escalating violence, other states face worse conditions.
There is little sign that the military intervention has helped. Marielle Franco, a popular city councilwoman who was critical of Mr. Temer and the federal intervention, was murdered this month. On Saturday, at least eight people died in a confrontation with the police in the Rocinha district of Rio de Janeiro.
