Obama Speaks in Milan, With Food as Text and Politics as Subtext
ROME — Barack Obama took his first step back onto the world stage on Tuesday, shedding his tie to give wide-ranging, if studiously nonpartisan, remarks during a food and technology conference in Milan.
First in a keynote address, during which he often consulted his notes, and then in a policy-heavy conversation with his former chef, Sam Kass, Mr. Obama spoke about how climate change was imperiling food production around the world and threatening to aggravate the “migration that has put such a burden on Europe.”
In a conversation that seemed intended to avoid making news, he also spoke about rain patterns, income inequality, privacy issues, his post-presidential life and cows. When President Trump was mentioned, Mr. Obama politely turned the page, saying that while “the current administration has differences with my administration in terms of energy policy,” he believed that “the private sector has already made a decision that the future is in clean energy.”
Since leaving office, Mr. Obama has kitesurfed with the billionaire Richard Branson, started writing his memoirs and begun earning speaking fees. Critics have accused Mr. Obama, who campaigned as a different kind of politician, of hypocrisy for accepting an offer of $400,000 to speak in September at a health care conference run by the Wall Street firm Cantor Fitzgerald.
Organizers of the event in Milan — the Seeds & Chips conference on global food innovation — declined to say how much Mr. Obama was paid, and the Obama Foundation declined to comment.
Mr. Obama could hardly have found safer ground for a return to the global stage than discussing food in Italy. He offered observations about how changing diets around the world were driving increases in carbon emissions from agriculture, and how agricultural interests tended to stick together politically across party lines.
“Because food is so close to us and is part of our family and is part of what we do every single day, people, I think, are more resistant to the idea of government or bureaucrats telling them what to eat, how to eat and how to grow,” he said.
But food may not have been all that was on some attendees’ minds.
Among the prominent attendees was Matteo Renzi, the former prime minister of Italy, with whom Mr. Obama has developed a rapport and whom he mentioned several times, calling him Matteo. Mr. Renzi, who resigned in December after voters rejected constitutional amendments he proposed, is trying to make a political comeback, and hoping that association with Mr. Obama will help him more this time.
Soon after Mr. Obama arrived in Milan on Monday morning, in dark sunglasses and an open white collar, he received Mr. Renzi at the Park Hyatt hotel.
They spoke for more than an hour, and according to a person close to Mr. Obama, they discussed the recent surge of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement in Italy, Mr. Renzi’s comeback attempt and concerns about Russian meddling in the Italian election.
At one point, according to Kevin Lewis, a spokesman for Mr. Obama, Mr. Renzi suggested that the two phone Emmanuel Macron, who won the French presidential election on Sunday, and congratulate him together.
The impromptu conference call seemed to connect a progressive power triumvirate that never was. Mr. Obama, 55, Mr. Renzi, 42, and Mr. Macron, 39, represent an alternate reality for a trans-Atlantic political landscape disrupted by Mr. Trump’s election and the rise of populist forces in other nations.
Mr. Macron decisively dispatched his hard-right opponent, but Mr. Renzi and Mr. Obama have more time on their hands now, and they made the most of it.
After their meeting, the two men went to the Palazzo Clerici for a dinner organized by the Obama Foundation and the Italian Institute for International Political Studies. Mr. Obama also found time for sightseeing. He viewed da Vinci’s “Last Supper,” which he tried to tie into his remarks about food.
After a somewhat wooden start at the lectern, he settled into a chair next to Mr. Kass and touched on a variety of topics: farmers, the role of employment in combating radicalization, income inequality. In the end, even Mr. Obama seemed a bit exhausted by the talk; he reminded Mr. Kass, to applause, that “I have to go home and have dinner with my family.”
