Irish Police Investigate (but Don’t Charge) Stephen Fry for Blasphemy
The British actor Stephen Fry is known as many things: a witty television presenter, a roguish Twitter personality and an outspoken atheist. Over the weekend, the Irish authorities considered whether to add another label to the list: alleged blasphemer.
The Irish police opened an investigation into whether remarks Mr. Fry made in a 2015 television interview — saying that God, if he existed at all, was a selfish maniac who deserved neither respect nor praise — had run afoul of a controversial blasphemy law enacted in 2009.
The inquiry didn’t last long. The authorities said on Monday night that no charges would be filed against Mr. Fry. But the news that they had even pursued the complaint to begin with set off an outpouring of bemusement and anger in Ireland, which has been grappling with its deeply conservative Catholic history.
“We are deluded if we think that the 2009 law is not actively influencing, limiting, even dictating the content that we are offered by our national media,” Emer O’Toole, a professor of Irish Studies at Concordia University in Montreal, wrote on Monday in an op-ed in The Independent, a British paper. “And we are even more deluded if we think that we are living in a secular society.”
The police declined to comment on the episode or to explain why they waited until now to respond to a complaint that, according to local media reports, was filed in rural County Clare shortly after Mr. Fry’s remarks were broadcast. The complainant, who has not been publicly identified, told The Irish Independent newspaper that he was not offended by Mr. Fry’s statements but nevertheless thought the actor broke the law.
The interview at the heart of the matter began with a simple question from the television host Gay Byrne: What would Mr. Fry say to God if the actor and the Almighty ever met face to face? Mr. Fry’s response, Mr. Byrne said afterward, was “the longest answer to that question that I ever got in this entire series.”
If God does exist, Mr. Fry said, he is “quite clearly a maniac” and “totally selfish.” He said he would ask God, “How dare you create a world in which there is such misery that is not our fault?”
“It’s utterly, utterly evil,” Mr. Fry continued. “Why should I respect a capricious, mean-minded, stupid God who creates a world which is so full of injustice and pain?”
Mr. Fry, who rose to fame in part through his portrayal of the outspoken 19th-century Irish writer Oscar Wilde, who had legal troubles of his own, declined to comment on the investigation, according to his representative, Christian Hodell.
Eoin Daly, a lecturer in law at the National University of Ireland, Galway, said Mr. Fry was never in any real danger of prosecution. He said the law was introduced in 2009 only because the country’s 1937 constitution required the country to have a blasphemy law, and an earlier one had been struck down in the courts.
Lawmakers did their best to make the 2009 law “almost unenforceable,” with broad exemptions to protect free speech, Mr. Daly said. “There was a constitutional obligation to legislate this offense, but it was not against the constitution to create an offense that was of no use.”
The Catholic Church has had profound cultural and political influence in Ireland, but adherence to its teachings has been waning in recent years. There are several continuing controversies in Ireland over the role of religion in public life, Mr. Daly noted, and Mr. Fry’s brush with the blasphemy law is probably the least urgent.
Ireland became the first country to legalize same-sex marriage by popular vote in 2015. Since then, it has been locked in a tense debate over abortion, which was banned in almost all cases by a 1982 referendum. Activists say thousands of Irish women leave the country for abortions each year.
The country has also experienced a string of scandals related to the Catholic Church’s role in managing public services, including the discovery of a mass grave on the site of a former publicly financed home for unwed mothers run by a religious order, the Sisters of Bon Secours.
“There has been a huge transformation of public opinion away from the orthodox Catholic positions over the last quarter of a century, but you still have significant church involvement in public services, especially education,” Mr. Daly said. “You could say the church has an outsize institutional role, considering the public opinion, values and beliefs in society.”
The blasphemy law may not last much longer. Simon Harris, the health minister, told reporters on Monday that the government hoped to hold a referendum to remove the constitutional requirement for the law, which he said was “silly, a little embarrassing and needs to be changed.”
“Stephen Fry, regardless of your own religious views, was clearly making a number of points that he clearly felt very strongly about, in his usual witty way,” Mr. Harris said.
