Ex-Soccer Star and Vice President Lead in Liberia Presidential Vote
MONROVIA, Liberia — A former professional soccer player and the incumbent vice president are leading in the first round of Liberia’s presidential election, partial results show, and may face each other in a runoff.
With votes from around 25 percent of polling stations counted, George Weah, once named African Player of the Century, and Vice President Joseph Boakai emerged as the top vote-getters among the 20 candidates in Tuesday’s election. Mr. Weah, with roughly 136,000 votes, was leading Mr. Boakai, with 105,000 votes.
But it was unclear whether Mr. Weah would be able to ultimately capture 50 percent plus one vote, the threshold to avoid a second round of balloting.
If no one reaches that level, the top two candidates will advance to a runoff election next month. They are seeking to replace Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who is stepping down after two terms as Africa’s first democratically elected female president.
The announcement of the partial results, made at Liberia’s National Elections Commission Thursday evening, was filled with drama. Many of Mr. Weah’s supporters had been proclaiming him the outright winner, and he appeared to be doing better than most political watchers had expected.
In populous Montserrado County, home to Monrovia, the capital, Mr. Weah had captured 50.4 percent of the vote with 15 percent of polls reporting. But Monrovia has been Mr. Weah’s stronghold, and Mr. Boakai, for his part, appeared to be pulling support from some unexpected places elsewhere in the country.
Turnout in the election appears to have been high, but there were several reports of irregularities. In one case, hundreds of people with registration cards spent the day demanding to vote in Bong County after poll workers there said their names were not on voter rolls.
The episode prompted officials from Mr. Weah’s party and the party of Alexander Cummings, a former Coca-Cola executive, to lodge complaints with the elections commission. Mr. Cummings was in third place alongside the lawyer Charles Brumskine.
Liberians began lining up to vote at 4 a.m. Tuesday, and things appeared to have proceeded without incident throughout most of the country.
“Almost all Liberians that turned out to vote were able to cast their ballots,” said Christopher Fomunyoh, senior associate for Africa at the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs. He said that in a few precincts with multiple polling sites, some voters stood in the wrong line for hours.
“We also witnessed a few cases of persons with voter cards not finding their names on the voters’ list,” he said.
Elections officials said they had worked to solve that issue, and that most voters were eventually able to cast ballots. Still, many people expressed frustration.
The final results of the first round will be announced Oct. 25.
