Ex-Presidential Candidate in South Korea Is Jailed for Sexual Assault
SEOUL, South Korea — An appeals court in South Korea sentenced a former presidential hopeful to three and a half years in prison for sexual assault on Friday, overturning a lower court’s acquittal in a case closely watched by supporters of the #MeToo movement.
The politician, Ahn Hee-jung, is the best known among a number of public figures who have been accused of sexual misconduct since the #MeToo movement gained force in South Korea early last year. A lower court in Seoul acquitted Mr. Ahn last August, saying there was not enough evidence to support the charges against him.
But the Seoul High Court threw out that ruling on Friday, convicting Mr. Ahn of raping his secretary, Kim Ji-eun, at least nine times between July 2017 and last February, while he was governor of South Chungcheong Province.
Mr. Ahn, 53, was arrested and taken to prison. He has a week to file an appeal to the Supreme Court.
Mr. Ahn had been seen as a potential successor to President Moon Jae-in, whose single term ends in 2022. He ran unsuccessfully against Mr. Moon for the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination in 2017.
His downfall began last March when Ms. Kim, his former secretary, said on television that he had repeatedly forced her to have sex with him. It was a rare public accusation for South Korea, where men dominate the upper echelons of a strictly hierarchical society and victims of sexual violence often stay silent for fear of shame and retaliation.
Throughout the trial, Mr. Ahn insisted that his sexual relationship with Ms. Kim had been consensual. His lawyers argued that she had not acted like a victim during the period in which she said she was raped.
They noted that she had accompanied Mr. Ahn to restaurants and wine bars, and they presented into evidence messages she had sent him, which they said showed her friendliness toward him. The lower court ruled that Ms. Kim lacked credibility.
But the appeals court rejected what it called the defense’s “stereotyped” view of a rape victim. It said that it found Ms. Kim’s testimony credible, consistent and detailed, and that Mr. Ahn had enough power to coerce her into unwanted sexual relations.
“The victim had to resort to the extreme measure of using her real name and exposing her face in order to appeal for redress,” said the presiding judge, Hong Dong-ki. “She was victimized again when unfounded stories about her spread during the investigation and trial.”
One such rumor on social media depicted Ms. Kim as a villain who had duped Mr. Ahn into a sexual relationship, then turned against him when he tried to end it. In a statement released through her lawyers on Friday, Ms. Kim said she had been like “a witch burned at the stake.”
The #MeToo movement took hold in South Korea in January last year, when Seo Ji-hyeon, a female prosecutor, appeared on TV to say she had been groped at a funeral by a male superior, who banished her to an obscure job after she filed a complaint. (The higher-ranking prosecutor, Ahn Tae-geun, was sentenced to two years in prison last week.)
Women have since come forward with accusations of sexual abuse against an array of prominent men, including theater directors, politicians, professors, religious leaders and a former coach for the national speedskating team. Many of the accused have since apologized and resigned from their positions, and several have faced criminal charges.
In September, a well-known theater director, Lee Youn-taek, was sentenced to six years in prison for sexually abusing actresses. In November, a prominent pastor received a 15-year sentence for raping female followers who said he had deceived them into believing he was God.
Ms. Kim’s accusation against Mr. Ahn, the former governor, were particularly shocking to many. He is from a generation of student leaders who fought for democracy under military rule in the 1980s and went on to political careers; such politicians often present themselves as being of better character than older conservatives, many of whom had connections to the dictatorship.
Mr. Ahn resigned as governor after his scandal broke, and he was later expelled from the Democratic Party.
