BBC Offers Clarification  Theresa May Isn’t Going to Brussels in a Warplane
LONDON — In the flood of news about Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union, a few seconds of black-and-white film broadcast on the BBC stood out on Wednesday.
As an anchor ended an evening news program by saying, “Theresa May says she intends to go back to Brussels to renegotiate her Brexit deal,” the screen showed grainy images of World War II planes that appeared to be Spitfires.
The odd pairing caught the eye of many viewers, who shared the video clip on social media.
“For those wondering — simple human error at end of #BBCNewsSix,” Paul Royall, the program’s editor, wrote on Twitter. “If and when it happens pretty certain PM not travelling to Brussels like this.”
Mr. Royall said the footage had been shown earlier on in the program to tease a story about a museum that opened at the former Biggin Hill airfield, the busiest during the Battle of Britain.
The program remained online in its original form on the BBC’s website until Thursday.
Among those who picked up on the error was Paul Reiderman, communications director at the European Council, who  posted the video on Twitter with a thinking face emoji.
Most who mentioned the show on Twitter were amused by the error, many asking whether it should be taken as an arch commentary on the prime minister, Brexit or British politics generally.
But in replies to Mr. Royall’s explanation, some said they did not believe it had been an accident — or at least that the BBC should be worried about people seeing it as intentional.
The BBC relies on money from British viewers and the government, and it is regularly accused of bias toward one side of the political spectrum or on questions like Scotland’s independence or Brexit.
In a column last summer about the issue, John Simpson, a veteran BBC journalist, defended the organization, while saying that more people than ever had such complaints.
“Maybe it’s because they’re so used to social media, and hearing only the kind of views they like, that they’re enraged by having to listen to arguments they hate,” he wrote.
