   The suspect accused of opening fire inside a California synagogue as well as a case of arson at another mosque was charged with more than 100 federal hate crime charges in connection with the April shooting, which left one dead and three others injured. 
   The suspect, John Earnest, is also facing a slew of criminal counts including murder and attempted murder for the deadly attack inside Chabad of Poway on April 27. 
   According to a federal criminal complaint filed Thursday, Earnest allegedly walked into the packed synagogue armed with an assault rifle and unleashed a torrent of bullets on those celebrating the final day of Passover. 
   During a pause in the gunfire — while Earnest unsuccessfully tried to reload his weapon — several congregants managed to chase him from the house of worship. 
   Lori Kaye-Gilbert, 60, was killed in the shooting while three others — Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein, Almog Peretz and his 8-year-old niece — were injured. 
   Earnest fled from the synagogue and was arrested shortly after he phoned 911, claiming to be involved in the deadly incident. 
   “I just shot up a synagogue. I’m just trying to defend my nation from the Jewish people,” he said according to the complaint. 
   “They’re destroying our people … I opened fire at a synagogue. Think I killed some people.” 
   The complaint charges Earnest with 54 counts of obstruction of free exercise of religious beliefs resulting in death and bodily injury and involving the attempt to kill. 
   “That’s one count for every person in the synagogue on April 27, including 12 children,” U.S. Attorney for Southern District of California Robert Brewer told reporters during a press conference. He added that each of the counts is “death penalty-eligible.” 
   Earnest faces another 54 hate crime act counts and an additional charge of damage to religious property in connection with a March fire deliberately set at an Escondido mosque. 
   “We will not allow our community members to be hunted in their houses of worship, where they should feel free and safe to exercise their right to practice their religion,” Brewer said in a press release. 
   “Our actions today are inspired by our desire to achieve justice for all of the victims and their families.” 
   According to the affidavit, officers discovered a manifesto online allegedly written by Earnest and another copy of it on his computer. It was rife with anti-Semitic and anti-Muslim remarks, including that his only regret was not having killed more people. 
   The manifesto also noted that he was inspired by recent shootings at two New Zealand mosques and at the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh. It additionally included his confession for the mosque arson. 
   People inside the house of worship on March 24 said they smelled gas and then spotted flames coming through the cracks in the door, according to the affidavit. The group managed to put out the flames, but not before the outside of the mosque was damaged. 
   “No one in this country should be subjected to unlawful violence, injury or death for who they are of for their religious beliefs,” said Assistant Attorney General Eric Dreiband for the Civil Rights Division. 
   “The Department will vigorously prosecute those who commit hate crimes and acts of domestic terrorism, and we will continue to work with our state and local partners to bring justice to anyone who violates the civil rights of Americans.”   
