Getting the Spelling Right on 46 Million Bank Notes? It’s a Big Responsibilty
It is our duty, our responsibility, to bring you this news: Australia put 46 million new dollar bills into circulation in October and months passed before anyone seemed to have noticed that the currency contained an unfortunate spelling error.
The admittedly tiny mistake, on the new $50 note, came to light this week, according to local reports, after someone spotted the typo and anonymously alerted a radio station to the problem: The last “i” in the word “responsibility” was missing.
The Reserve Bank of Australia told local publications that it would fix the mistake, but leave the millions of notes bearing the misspelled word in circulation.
[Sign up for the Australia Letter newsletter.]
“The error is being corrected as part of a normal print run so there is no additional cost,” the bank said in a statement provided to Nine.com.au, an Australian news website. “We are not withdrawing or recalling bank notes with the spelling error.”
A representative of the bank defended the institution, arguing that mistakes happen, according to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
“The process of designing and printing a bank note is complex and iterative,” the representative said. “We have strict quality assurance processes, but like any manufacturing process, errors can occur.”
The error appears in what the bank describes as “microprint,” a miniature section of text, which in this case also doubles as the ground beneath a women’s and maternity hospital depicted on the note.
The hospital was established a century ago with help from several prominent Australian women, including Edith Cowan, the first female member of any Australian parliament. The passage is an excerpt from Ms. Cowan’s first speech to the Western Australian Parliament.
“It is a great responsibility to be the only woman here, and I want to emphasize the necessity which exists for other women being here,” she said in the speech, delivered in July 1921.
A portrait of Ms. Cowan appears alongside the text. The opposite side of the bill includes a portrait of David Unaipon, an Indigenous Australian writer and inventor.
The notes entered circulation in late October, part of a broader currency refresh called the “Next Generation Banknotes.”
The $50 note includes several advanced features, such as raised bumps for the visually impaired, holographic effects and a transparent window.
