Yael Stone Is Identified as ‘Witness X’ in Geoffrey Rush Defamation Case
SYDNEY, Australia — A mystery witness who lawyers had hoped would provide evidence of an alleged pattern of inappropriate behavior by the actor Geoffrey Rush in his defamation battle against Rupert Murdoch’s Nationwide News has been formally identified as the Australian actress Yael Stone.
The Federal Court of Australia on Friday lifted an order suppressing the identity of “witness X,” as she was originally called, revealing her to be Ms. Stone, who is best known for her work in the Netflix series “Orange Is the New Black.”
In an interview published in December, Ms. Stone, 34, told The New York Times that Mr. Rush danced naked in front of her when both were starring in a 2010-11 Sydney production of “The Diary of a Madman.” She also alleged that he used a mirror to watch her while she was in the shower and sent her sexually suggestive text messages. At the time of the alleged incidents, she was 25 years old and Mr. Rush was 59.
[Read Yael Stone’s interview with The New York Times about Geoffrey Rush.]
The identification of Ms. Stone inserts a potential new element into the legal battle over Mr. Rush’s reputation, just a month after he won his defamation suit against Nationwide News, which publishes the Sydney tabloid newspaper The Daily Telegraph.
Mr. Rush was awarded 850,000 Australian dollars, or nearly $600,000, in initial damages. Damages for his economic losses are still to be determined, but could run into the millions of dollars.
Mr. Rush, 67, argued during the trial that two front-page articles published in The Daily Telegraph in late 2017 wrongly portrayed him as a “sexual predator” and a “pervert.”
The articles suggested that the Oscar-winning actor behaved inappropriately toward an unnamed female co-star, later revealed to be Eryn Jean Norvill, during a 2015-16 Sydney Theater Company production of “King Lear.” One article was accompanied by a photograph of Mr. Rush in character with the headline “King Leer.”
Midway through the two-week trial late last year, Nationwide News called on Ms. Stone (then known publicly only as witness X) to provide evidence in its defense. However, Justice Michael Wigney rejected the last-minute bid and ordered Ms. Stone’s identity suppressed.
Nationwide News is now appealing the defamation verdict. A key element of the appeal is that the judge refused the publisher’s application to amend its defense to include evidence from Ms. Stone.
Nationwide News has also requested that Justice Wigney recuse himself from hearing the application.
“One of the issues that the appeal court will need to decide is whether or not the judge made the right decision when deciding to exclude that evidence,” said Sophie Dawson, a Sydney-based partner at the law firm Bird & Bird and an expert in media and defamation law.
“The fact that Yael Stone has been revealed as witness X doesn’t really change a lot for the case at this stage — it is likely that the court knew her identity,” Ms. Dawson said. “The lifting of the suppression order has just made it available to the public.”
Lawyers for both Mr. Rush and Ms. Stone refused to comment.
The court has continued to suppress the exact nature of Ms. Stone’s allegations against Mr. Rush.
In her December 2018 interview with The Times, Ms. Stone recalled, in particular, an incident with Mr. Rush in the shared dressing room showers.
“I remember I looked up to see there was a small shaving mirror over the top of the partition between the showers and he was using it to look down at my naked body,” she said in the interview. “I believe that it was meant with a playful intention, but the effect was that I felt there was nowhere for me to feel safe and unobserved.”
She added of her decision to come forward: “I feel a responsibility to speak.”
In a statement, Mr. Rush said that Ms. Stone’s allegations “are incorrect and in some instances have been taken completely out of context.”
“Clearly Yael has been upset on occasion by the spirited enthusiasm I generally bring to my work,” he said. “I sincerely and deeply regret if I have caused her any distress.”
