What to Watch For in the European Parliament Election Results
BRUSSELS — With more than 400 million Europeans across the 28 countries of the European Union entitled to vote in the European Parliament elections that end on Sunday, the poll is, next to India, the largest democratic exercise in the world.
But since these elections began 40 years ago, when the bloc was only 15 countries, turnout to vote for the Parliament — the bloc’s only directly elected branch — has decreased every five years.
Turnout was among the key indicators: Would it decline below the 42.6 percent of 2014, or would Europeans respond to calls from both populists and mainstream politicians who suggested that this election was important for the future of Europe?
[Follow our coverage of European election results.]
Over all, preliminary figures later on Sunday showed that for 27 nations, excluding Britain, turnout was nearing 51 percent, according to the European Parliament spokesman, Jaume Duch Guillot, the highest in at least 20 years. Turnout was also higher this year than five years ago in key countries like France, Germany, Poland and Spain. It was roughly the same in Italy and marginally higher in Slovakia, where traditionally less than 20 percent of eligible voters bother to vote. In France, turnout was projected to break 50 percent for the first time since 1994.
With much attention on how the continent’s various strands of populists will do, another crucial question is whether the populist surge will produce a counterreaction among voters who support the European Union but are traditionally more apathetic.
Marietje Schaake, a liberal Dutch lawmaker who is not running for re-election, said the vote was “between the builders and the breakers.” The breakers have more passion; will the builders and the pro-Europeans have come out to vote?
Results for all 28 states will be released late Sunday after the last polls close. Here are some of the main issues at play.
There are varying strains of populists in Europe, and they do not all agree with one another.
But they are united for the most part in opposing immigration, strengthening Europe’s borders, hammering “the elites” and increasing the power of national governments against “Brussels,” a generic word for the European Union’s technocratic bureaucracy.
[In Parliament Elections, Populists Seek to Break the E.U. From Within]
The populists as an unruly collective are making most of the noise, led by the rollicking Italian deputy prime minister, Matteo Salvini of the right-wing League. Mr. Salvini has campaigned hard, and has pulled other far-right leaders into some rallies in the hopes of creating a more coherent transnational bloc in the European Parliament.
He has had some success, but it is hard to create an “internationale of nationalists,” especially since, just to pick one example, he is sympathetic to and supportive of Russia, while Polish populists of the governing Law and Justice party are viscerally anti-Russian.
They are so anti-Russian that Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the effective head of Law and Justice, said last week that Marine Le Pen, the far-right leader in France, was “obviously linked to Moscow and receives its support.” Given its size, Poland has a significant number of seats, but the Polish populists will have difficulty working with Ms. Le Pen and Mr. Salvini.
The center-right and center-left groups of parties, which together had long created a working majority in the Parliament, are both expected to lose seats.
Populists and euroskeptics may win as many as 180 of the 751 seats, enough to create lots of trouble. While most of those elected will be more traditional pro-Europeans, the old working majority is expected to disappear.
Those parties will have to seek alliances with liberal and centrist parties, perhaps including the Greens group and La République
