The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter reflecting the experience (and quirks) of our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email. Here’s where to find all our Australia and New Zealand coverage.
______
Even when Maureen Dowd is jet-lagged, she can turn a phrase that lingers in your mind forever.
Last night, at a small event in Sydney for New York Times subscribers that we hosted with Advance, a network of global Australians, the Times columnist compared Barack Obama to Luke Skywalker. “He had the force, he just didn’t always use it,” she said.
A minute later, she explained that many voters never warmed to Hillary Clinton because “they wanted a Rottweiler to bite the face off of Washington.”
That’s just a taste.
Her conversation in Melbourne with Julia Baird at the National Gallery of Victoria included another round of zingers, as no doubt will her appearance at the Antidote Festival on Sunday at the Sydney Opera House.
But for those unable to see her live in Australia, why miss out?
Here are a few highlights from her recent conversations in Australia:
‘Ego Arithmetic’
This is the main thing you need to know about President Trump, Maureen said: He thinks in terms of numbers that tell him how important he is.
When she asked him why he thought he could be president back when he first considered it in 1999, for example, he told her, “I always get the highest ratings on Larry King.”
Plus, he added, his name can found on buildings in New York, and his wife, Melania, (who was then his girlfriend) appears on lots of magazine covers. This conversation, Maureen said, occurred on his private plane filled with junk food.
And he hasn’t changed much in the White House. He even calls it “the set,” she said, as if it’s just for him and just for television.
“He’s thinking of this as a reality show and he will get those ratings,” Maureen said. “He’s an attention addict.”
‘We’re the Selfie Stick’
What about the role of the media covering President Trump?
When asked about this last night, she acknowledged that the media and the president are caught in an intense symbiotic relationship. The most intense relationship in Washington, Maureen said, is not between the president and his wife but the president and the press.
“He’s the selfie president, we’re the selfie stick,” she said.
Still, she added, The New York Times and the family that owns it (the Sulzbergers) have made clear that they are not part of “the resistance” to President Trump.
Even when pushed — at an Oscars party, for example, where various Hollywood stars warmly greeted our publisher, A.G. Sulzberger, and pushed him to echo their own frustrations, Maureen said, he resisted and refused to be pushed into that role.
‘The Hall Monitors’
Maureen is no less scathing with the Democrats as she is with Republicans. When she comes at you, “it’s not your fault, it’s just your turn,” is how our publisher puts it.
Last night proved the point. After lambasting President Trump, she said she also blamed the Democrats — the party that used to be so connected to her own roots, as a daughter of working-class Irish Americans — for losing touch and becoming the party of scolds.
“They give off this hall monitor supercilious air — and this entitled air,” she said.
Even President Obama, she said, sometimes failed to grasp the need to woo voters rather than hector them.
“People voted for Barack to bring us into modernity,” she said, “but he could have explained it more and brought people along more.”
When dealing with Congress too, she added, he often showed that “he’d rather be right than win.”
Now, she added, with President Trump dismantling his legacy, “he’s learned you have to win first before you’re right.”
On that note, let’s get to the news of the week, from all over the world (Canberra included).
Also for those who are not subscribers, we have a deal for you: A New York Times digital subscription for $1 (AUD) per week. That’s the lowest price we’ve offered in Australia and the math is simple: More subscriptions means more journalism in Australia and all over the world, along with access to events and other benefits.
Subscribe for yourself or a loved one, then tell us what you’d like to see more of from your New York Times at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
I failed to include this story last week, but it lasts beyond the news cycle. Our Interpreter columnists traveled to a small town in Germany that was the site of anti-refugee attacks after researchers completed a landmark study showing that Facebook made communities more prone to racial violence.
It’s a chilling example of the way algorithms impact human behavior.
______
Speaking of technology, did you see that President Trump appears to have googled himself and discovered a whole mess of critical coverage? He was not happy. He accused the company of suppressing conservative news outlets.
Our Opinion columnist, Kara Swisher, called the accusation ludicrous. “The allegation is both wildly untrue and mostly easily proved false in all kinds of ways,” she wrote.
______
Betraying my own pop culture age and bias, I really loved this Ethan Hawke profile by Taffy Brodesser-Akner. I used to live on the same street as him in Brooklyn and so much of what Taffy wrote feels familiar, but also just what I imagined a long conversation with him would be like.
More than that, it’s also about art and when to ignore crowds who think they have you pegged.
Looking for another great profile? Check out this magazine piece about Riz Ahmed, who has starred in everything from “Star Wars” to Shakespeare. Here’s what he said on Twitter about his experience with The Times:
______
The New York Times Magazine also has a regular “tips” feature and this week it tackles something I hope to never need: How to survive a shark attack.
The key detail: punch that beast in the eye or the gills.
______
Features
Overlooked No More: Ruby Payne-Scott, Who Explored Space With Radio Waves: Our long overdue obituary for one of Australia’s most important technical geniuses, who helped establish the field of radio astronomy by using radio waves to detect solar bursts, but was forced to resign after she got married.
Was a Scientist’s Death Murder or an ‘Act of Mercy’?: Mary E. White was a highly regarded scientist whose mind was ravaged by dementia. Her daughter is accused of killing her, but in the small town in New South Wales where it happened, her death has set off a broader debate about mercy, aging and euthanasia.
The State Should Stay Clear of the Confession Booth: Waleed Aly argues that requiring priests to turn in people who confess to child abuse will backfire.
Oh, Canberra!
Scott Morrison Is a New Kind of Australian Prime Minister: An Evangelical Christian: We were among the first to take a deeper look at his church, his faith and the way that Christians see him.
Another Round in Australia’s Political Churn: George Megalogenis tries to explain to the world why Australia can’t seem to hold onto its prime ministers.
A New Australian Cabinet: The most significant changes in the cabinet appointed by Scott Morrison involved Australia’s relationship to the world.
For Fun
How Ronny Chieng, Comedian and Actor, Spends His Sundays: Our Sunday Routine feature out of New York digs into the weekend of the “Crazy Rich Asians” star with Australian (and Malaysian) roots.
For Sale: 55-Foot-Tall Lobster. Owners in a Pinch. Can You Help? If someone doesn’t step up and make an offer on Larry the Lobster by Monday, one small town in South Australia will lose its Big Thing. Isabella Kwai investigates.
______
Two books that came up in conversations with Maureen Dowd round out my newsletter this week:
“White Working Class,” by Joan C. Williams
Maureen said Joe Biden, the former vice president, recommended this book to her. Here’s the article it’s based on.
”Chasing Hillary,” by Amy Chozick
Amy covered Hillary Clinton for years at The Times and Maureen told several people who asked about her own critical Clinton coverage to give this book a read so they could better understand the Clinton campaign’s many flaws.
