The Syrian War  Today’s Top Developments
President Trump said Monday that he was halting trade negotiations with Turkey and doubling tariffs on imports of Turkish steel as relations between the countries continued to deteriorate.
Mr. Trump said that he was increasing steel tariffs on Turkey to 50 percent from 25 percent, and warned that additional economic sanctions were coming.
The United States imposed a 50-percent steel tariff on Turkey last year amid a conflict over an American pastor, Andrew Brunson, who was detained in Turkey and accused of espionage. The tariff was later reduced to 25 percent.
Saudi Arabia has spoken out publicly for the first time about President Trump’s abrupt decision to pull American forces out of northern Syria, with one top diplomat calling the results “a disaster for the region.”
That was the response Monday from the kingdom’s newly arrived ambassador to London, Prince Khalid bin Bandar bin Sultan.
The decision “does not give one incredible confidence,” the ambassador said when asked whether the pullout had altered the kingdom’s assessment of Mr. Trump’s reliability as an ally. “We are concerned, no question,” he said.
Prince Khalid, speaking in a public discussion with the BBC newscaster Frank Gardner at the Royal United Services Institute, addressed the Syria withdrawal and the upheaval that followed with unusual candor for a diplomat from the kingdom. Official public communications there are usually highly formal and tightly restricted, and Saudi Arabia had studiously avoided criticizing the United States’ Syria policy.
“The last thing we need in the region is another front of chaos, and I think we just got it,” he said.
At the same time, Prince Khalid noted that Mr. Trump had also agreed this week to send some American troops and missile batteries to Saudi Arabia, in order to help “manage the northern defenses.” Those moves came in the aftermath of a crippling attack on the kingdom’s most important oil installation, carried out last month by a barrage of low-flying cruise missiles or drones.
Now the Saudis are trying to square the American decision to send it support with Mr. Trump’s decision to pull out of northern Syria.
 “Luckily, I am not the ambassador to Washington,” the ambassador joked.
 
In a conversation after the talk, Prince Khaled also said that Mr. Trump’s pullout of Syria had increased the influence in the region of the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, a main sponsor of the Syrian government.
“Russia is becoming an important player in the region — whether one likes it or not, it is a fact,” Prince Khalid said. 
“The Russians,” he said, “do to a certain extent understand the East better than the West does.”


The return of government forces to northeastern Syria not only deals a blow to Kurdish-led forces who were supported by the United States, but also signals a major shift in Syria’s eight-year war.
The Syrian Army entered the town of Tel Tamer in northeastern Syria, the state news media reported on Monday, soon after the government of President Bashar al-Assad forged an alliance with the Kurdish forces that control the region.
The Syrian government had been almost entirely absent from the northeast since it withdrew or was chased out by armed rebels in the early years of Syria’s civil war. The Syrian Democratic Forces, a Kurdish-led militia that worked with the United States to fight the Islamic State, soon became the region’s overarching political force.
Although the Syrian Kurds did not declare Mr. al-Assad’s government an enemy, the Syrian president looked askance at their goal of self-rule and vowed to retake all his country’s territory. He had no way to do so, however, especially with American troops remaining in the area.
President Trump’s decision last week to move those troops out of the way of a Turkish incursion gave Mr. al-Assad an opening, and his forces began to fill it on Monday. Trucks drove large numbers of Syrian soldiers into the area to take up positions.
In some towns, they were welcomed by residents who chanted nationalistic slogans and carried Mr. al-Assad’s photograph. 
Tel Tamer is a strategic crossroads that connects northeastern Syria with the country’s northern hub, Aleppo, and is 20 miles from Ras al Ain, the center of the Turkish assault. 
If Syrian government forces can reach the Turkish border to the north and the Iraqi border to the east, it would be a major breakthrough in Mr. al-Assad’s quest to re-establish his control over the whole country. 
Syrian government forces also entered the town of Ain Issa on Monday, a day after it was briefly overrun by Turkish-led troops. Around 500 ISIS sympathizers took advantage of the mayhem and escaped detention, local officials said. 
