Philippine Mayor Accused of Drug Ties by Duterte Dies in Police Raid
MANILA — A mayor who had been accused by President Rodrigo Duterte of involvement in drug trafficking was killed along with his wife and 10 other people in coordinated police raids early Sunday, the authorities said.
Reynaldo Parojinog, the mayor of Ozamiz in the southern Philippines, died in a firefight at his home after his security personnel shot at drug enforcement officers, who had come to arrest him and three members of his family, according to the Philippine National Police.
His wife, Susan Parojinog, and five other people were also killed, and a second raid at another house owned by the family left five more people dead, the police said. Mr. Parojinog’s daughter, Nova Princess Parojinog-Echavez, the deputy mayor of Ozamiz, was among “scores” of people arrested, said Ernesto Abella, a spokesman for Mr. Duterte.
The police said they confiscated high-powered rifles, bundles of cash and an unspecified amount of methamphetamines at Mr. Parojinog’s home. A police official, Chief Superintendent Timoteo Pacleb, said that one officer had been wounded in the firefight but that his life was not in danger.
Mr. Parojinog and his daughter were among more than 150 Philippine officials, including mayors, judges and police officers, who Mr. Duterte accused of being involved with illegal narcotics in a televised speech last August. The Parojinogs denied the accusation.
Mr. Parojinog is at least the third mayor on that list to die in an encounter with the police. In October, Samsudin Dimaukom, mayor of the small town of Datu Saudi-Ampatuan in the southern Philippines, was gunned down at a checkpoint by police officers, who said his guards had fired at them. In November, another mayor, Rolando Espinosa Sr., was shot and killed by police officers in his jail cell.
The raids on Sunday came just days after Mr. Duterte, in his annual speech to Congress, pledged to continue his bloody crackdown on drugs, which has left thousands of people dead at the hands of police officers or vigilantes since he took office last summer.
“I have resolved that no matter how long it takes, the fight against illegal drugs will continue because it is the root cause of suffering,” Mr. Duterte said, asking the United Nations, the European Union and other critics to educate people about drugs rather than condemn him. He said that those involved in drug trafficking would face “either jail or hell.”
Carlos H. Conde, a Philippines-based researcher for Human Rights Watch, said after Mr. Duterte’s speech that it was a sign that the deaths would continue. “This can only mean more extrajudicial killings and the perpetuation of impunity and absence of accountability,” Mr. Conde said.
