France to End Disposal of $900 Million in Unsold Goods Each Year
LONDON — France plans to outlaw the destruction of unsold consumer products, a practice that currently results in the disposal of new goods worth 800 million euros, or more than $900 million, in the country each year.
By 2023, manufacturers and retailers will have to donate, reuse or recycle the goods, Prime Minister Édouard Philippe said on Tuesday of the measure, which the government billed as the first of its kind.
“It is waste that defies reason,” Mr. Philippe said at a discount store in Paris, according to Agence France-Presse, and he called the practice “scandalous.”
Under a new measure that will be part of a bill set to be debated by the government in July, destroying unsold goods could result in financial penalties or prison time.
The practice — widespread across the retail and consumer industry as a way to free up warehouse space or prevent unwanted items from being sold at a significant discount — has received bad press in France recently.
In January, Reporters for Capital, an investigative program on the French network M6, followed the path of brand-new unsold goods destined for disposal at the online retailer Amazon’s warehouse near the eastern town of Chalon-sur-Saône.
Plastic toys, a coffee maker and sealed packs of diapers were among the goods destined for destruction at the warehouse. Some were brought to waste-management facilities and destroyed, and others were taken to a landfill, the investigation found.
Amazon said on Twitter at the time that the company was striving “to reduce the number of products for which there was no other choice but destruction.” The company said that only a small fraction of its unsold goods were destroyed.
In an interview on the program that showed the exposé, Brune Poirson, an ecology minister who prepared the bill to be debated by the government, said she was shocked by what she saw. “Companies like Amazon, for example, will not be able to throw away products that are fit for consumption,” she said.
Dominique Roux, a professor at the University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne who has researched consumer attitudes toward waste, said in a phone interview on Wednesday: “There have been a certain number of recent scandals, including fashion brands destroying unsold goods. It is this moral scandal around the wasting of usable products that led the government to legislate.”
Last year, the British luxury brand Burberry said it would stop burning tens of millions of dollars’ worth of unsold clothes and cosmetics, a practice that it had long maintained to preserve “brand value.” Burberry was not alone among luxury brands to destroy goods rather than have them be potentially stolen or resold for a tiny fraction of their in-store price.
The change in France comes at a time when people are increasingly conscious about waste, with discussions of environmental issues like climate change also receiving heightened attention. France has recently pushed forward on environmental issues, pledging to end the sale of vehicles that run on fossil fuels by 2040 and shelving the construction of a major commercial airport after protests over its impact on the environment.
Still, Mr. Macron’s administration has attracted criticism for moving too slowly. Last spring, the environment minister, Nicolas Hulot, resigned from the government, suggesting that it was not acting sufficiently on issues like climate change and clean energy.
But there is a growing public awareness in France about the wastefulness of throwing away products or not using them for years, Professor Roux said.
France already requires large supermarkets to donate, rather than throw away, food that is still edible. Parliament passed a law in 2016 making it a criminal offense to refuse charities’ requests for donations of food that has been taken off the shelves — a measure that has since increased food donations to charities by 22 percent, the government says.
The country is not alone in fighting food waste. The European Union wants to reduce such waste nearly a third by 2025.
