Philippine Police Are Accused of Killing South Korean Businessman
MANILA — A South Korean businessman was strangled at the headquarters of the Philippine National Police last year by officers who later extorted ransom money from his family under the pretense that he was alive, the Philippine Department of Justice said on Thursday.
The Department of Justice said the officers had seized the businessman, Jee Ick-joo, 53, at his home in a Manila suburb in October under the pretense of a drug raid and had then taken him to Police Headquarters and killed him. Rights groups tied the killing to President Rodrigo Duterte’s bloody antidrug campaign, saying that the officers had been emboldened by Mr. Duterte’s promise to shield from prosecution those involved in the crackdown.
The national police chief, Ronald dela Rosa, a close aide of Mr. Duterte’s, expressed anger and shame over the episode on Thursday, but he said it was an “isolated” case and not part of the antidrug campaign.
The rogue officers were led by an anti-narcotics representative, Ricky Santa Isabel, the Justice Department said in a resolution recommending that charges be filed. It said that Officer Santa Isabel, another police officer named Roy Villegas, a civilian and several other people whose names were not released should be charged with homicide and kidnapping for ransom.
Officer Santa Isabel and Officer Villegas were in custody on Thursday.
According to the Department of Justice, the officers detained Mr. Jee at his home in the suburb of Angeles City on Oct. 18, announcing that they were searching the home for drugs but actually intending to extort money from his family.
No evidence that Mr. Jee was involved in drugs has been produced. He worked for Hanjin Heavy Industries, a South Korean shipbuilder, according to the police.
Officer Villegas said in a sworn statement that Officer Santa Isabel had led the operation and had killed Mr. Jee at Police Headquarters, wrapping his head in packing tape and strangling him, according to the Department of Justice. His body was cremated at a funeral home owned by a former police officer, where a set of golf clubs belonging to Mr. Jee was later found, the department said.
After the killing, the officers demanded ransom from Mr. Jee’s wife, Choi Kyung-jin, pretending that her husband was still alive, the Department of Justice said. A Philippine newspaper quoted her as saying that she had paid them the equivalent of $100,000 on Oct. 31.
The South Korean foreign minister, Yun Byung-se, expressed “grave shock” in a statement and said he was in contact with his Philippine counterpart, Perfecto Yasay Jr.
Phelim Kine, deputy director of Human Rights Watch in Asia, said the episode pointed to “the breakdown of rule of law” under Mr. Duterte’s six-month-old administration. “Philippine police have good reason to believe that they can literally get away with murder,” he wrote online.
“Until the Philippine government stops the drug war killings and seeks meaningful accountability for its thousands of victims, Jee Ick-joo’s murder may portend a flood of for-profit killings by cops,” Mr. Kine wrote.
More than 6,000 killings in the Philippines have been linked to Mr. Duterte’s crackdown on drug dealers and addicts. Many of those killings are believed to have been carried out by vigilantes, but the police have said that more than 2,000 of the dead were killed in shootouts with officers. Mr. Duterte has promised to shield such officers from prosecution, but Human Rights Watch says the police have not provided evidence that they had acted in self-defense.
Mr. dela Rosa said on Thursday that the abduction and killing was “not part of the drug war.” and that he was “very angry” about the allegations.
“If I had my way, I would kill them,” he told a Philippine radio station, referring to the accused officers.
