1894  Germany Arrests Russian Official Accused of Spying
[FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT] BERLIN, Sept. 17 — I have received a number of details on the alleged arrest of the Russian Naval Attaché, M. de Dubassoff, while making plans of the fortifications at Pillau. A high functionary of police has been sent in all haste to Pillau to hold an inquiry into the affair. At the Russian Embassy nothing can be learned. The officials of the Embassy deny in toto the charges made against M. de Dubassoff.
I understand, however, that the secret political police here have been watching the movements of certain high functionaries of the Russian Embassy suspected of organising a far-reaching system of espionage. Three years ago, the police here arrested the secretary of Baron Krieger, the former Russian Naval Attaché, in flagrante delicto of espionage. Though it was well known that he had been acting under the instructions of his employer, the German Government did not wish to make any scandal, and confined themselves to demanding the recall of Baron Krieger.
HIS RECALL DEMANDED
This time, however, it is the Attaché himself who is suspected. It is stated that the German Government will insist on his immediate recall. I give this report under all reserve, for it is doubtful if Count Caprivi will take such a serious step and one so likely to deeply offend the Government of the Czar. It is, however, certain that for some time past, M. de Dubassoff’s movements have been closely watched by the secret police, which declares that it has in its possession proofs of the existence of an immense network of espionage organised by certain functionaries of the Russian Embassy and directed from Berlin.
The speech of Prince Bismarck on the Polish question has caused a great sensation in Court circles here, as it amounts to a severe criticism of the Emperor’s policy vis-à-vis the Poles. In fact, part of the ex-Chancellor’s speech was addressed to the Emperor directly, blaming his relations with what is known as the Polish Court party, which is led by Baron Koscielski and his beautiful wife, and which enjoys a large measure of the Imperial favor. Even the Liberal press, which is, as a rule, hostile to the Chancellor, approves his utterances on this occasion without reserve. The Prince has undoubtedly touched a national chord in his speech, and one which will meet with the approval of all parties.
COUNT LANZA’S RETURN
A rumor is in circulation that Count Lanza, the Italian Ambassador, will shortly return to his post from Monza, and that he will be the bearer of autograph letters from King Humbert and Queen Margherita to the Emperor William and his consort.
The Emperor is extremely pleased with the bearing and discipline of the troops in East Prussia. In the course of conversation with the general commanding the 17th Corps, he said: “The troops are more than excellent. I am sure that my two army corps in East Prussia would defeat at the first meeting any enemy coming from the North.”
These words will hardly please the Russians. It seems pretty certain that relations between the two Courts are again far from cordial. This is proved by the absence of the Cesarevitch at the recent manoeuvres and of a representative of the Czar at the ceremony of the unveiling of the monument to the Emperor William I.
The Emperor’s camp equipage, constructed specially by Herr Neuss, the Court carriage builder, excites the liveliest curiosity everywhere. It contains a number of electric accumulators and a table so arranged that the Emperor can write while the carriage is in movement. In the evening it is lit up by electricity.
According to a rumor in circulation, Colonel Engelbrecht, the German Military Attaché at Rome, has made a very unfavorable report upon the recent manoeuvres of the Italian army.
— The New York Herald, European Edition, Sept. 19, 1894
