The Trump-Like Figures Popping Up in Central Europe
WARSAW — Political outsiders across Central Europe, preaching a populist message and promising to overturn the establishment, have felt the wind at their backs since the election of the new American president. We recently profiled one of them, Veselin Mareshki of Bulgaria, who says he sees himself as “an anti-establishment candidate like Donald Trump.” Many others embrace the connection, too, whether it is their backgrounds in business, their bombastic personalities, or their canny use of celebrity and social media.
Andrej Babis, 62, Czech Republic
Undoubtedly the best-known businessman-turned-politician in Central Europe, Mr. Babis transformed an agribusiness conglomerate into a diversified corporate behemoth that includes major media properties. In 2011, he formed his own party, ANO, and promised to bring business sense to government on an anticorruption platform. The party did so well in parliamentary elections that Mr. Babis was named finance minister. He is widely considered the likeliest next prime minister. He has rejected comparisons with President Trump, whom he criticized as a poor businessman. But he has also added that he and the new American president share an aversion to immigration and a tendency to say politically incorrect things.
Boris Kollar, 51, Slovakia 
Mr. Kollar, a wealthy businessman, formed his own political party last year — Sme Rodina, or “We Are Family” — and shocked the Slovak establishment by earning 11 seats in the country’s 150-seat National Council on a platform of libertarian economics, Euro-skepticism and fierce opposition to more immigration. His slogan: “Trust me, I’m not a politician.” A well-known tabloid figure and media celebrity, Mr. Kollar has 10 children from nine different mothers.
Bogoljub Karic, 63, Serbia
Mr. Karic, along with three brothers and a sister, built a family business empire that has expanded to telecommunications, construction, finance, media and international trade. He also started the private BK University. But his initial foray into politics ended with his fleeing into exile in 2006, under investigation by Serbia’s chief organized crime prosecutor, which he characterized as politically motivated. Mr. Karic returned to Serbia on Dec. 30, just days after the prosecutor ended the investigation without charges. Mr. Karic denies he will run for president in the coming elections, but notes
