Islamic State Is ‘On the Run,’ U.S. Commander Says
BAGHDAD — The American commander of the international military campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria said Wednesday that the militants were “on the run” and facing defeat as the American-led coalition made plans to kill or capture several thousand remaining insurgents.
The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh, is clinging to roughly 5 percent of the territory it controlled in the two countries three years ago, the commander, Lt. Gen. Paul E. Funk II, said in an interview.
“Daesh has no chance to win,” General Funk said. “The outcome is not in doubt.”
He said only about 1,500 to 2,500 militants remain in western Iraq near the Syrian border, and an additional 2,500 to 5,500 in the Euphrates River valley in eastern Syria. The coalition said that the territory controlled by the Islamic State in both countries had dropped from a peak of more than 40,000 square miles in 2014 to about 2,700 square miles today, split roughly between Iraq and Syria.
“They cannot hold territory,” General Funk said. “They cannot hold any viable cities. Their leaders have abandoned them.”
But he warned that Islamic State militants in both countries were likely to mount terrorist attacks and maintain underground cells even after losing control of territory. He said the coalition planned to turn soon to training Iraqi security forces to combat any Islamic State resurgence.
The Trump administration and the Pentagon have not specified how long the American train-and-assist mission would last, but they have emphasized they will not repeat the Obama administration’s decision in 2011 to withdraw.
Col. Ryan Dillon, the coalition spokesman in Baghdad, said timelines for the mission’s future had not been discussed in detail with the Iraqi government. He said previous American commanders had recommended keeping an American military presence in Iraq to assist in training even after the Islamic State was defeated.
Iraq’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, warned during a state visit to Turkey on Wednesday that driving the militants from their territory would not eliminate the threat. “ISIS is very dangerous, and if given any chance they will return,” he said.
General Funk said the coalition would continue to hunt down foreign Islamic State fighters before they can return to their home countries.
“The real problem is the virtual caliphate that continues to recruit,” he said.
Counterterrorism officials said last week that the number of combat-hardened Islamic State fighters returning home to Europe and North Africa was much smaller than anticipated. They said American efforts to prevent fighters from leaving liberated cities such as Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria had been successful.
Within Iraq, General Funk said, the conflict between Kurdish fighters and Iraqi security forces has shifted Iraq’s focus away from fighting the Islamic State. A Kurdish vote for independence last month prompted an Iraqi military campaign that has driven Kurdish forces from almost all the contested areas they had held since 2014, including the oil-rich province of Kirkuk.
The two sides were part of a nine-month coalition effort that evicted the militants from the Iraqi city of Mosul in July. The United States has armed and trained both Iraqi security forces and Kurdish fighters, known as pesh merga.
The pesh merga are not involved in the coalition operation in western Iraq because their forces are in northern Iraq. But General Funk said the Kurds should focus on holding and securing territory taken from the Islamic State in northern Iraq rather than battling Iraq’s military.
“We don’t need Iraqis killing Iraqis when we have Daesh to kill out in the west,” General Funk said. “It’s Iraqis versus Iraqis here, and I cannot emphasize enough that they need to handle this issue peacefully.”
“Now, at the 11th hour, they are letting up,” he added. “I want them to keep their foot on the neck of ISIS.”
General Funk said he had met regularly with military commanders on both sides to urge them to settle the dispute and focus on the Islamic State, but added, “They don’t always take my advice.”
Asked about remarks this week by Secretary of State Rex Tillerson that Iranian-armed Shiite Muslim militias serving with the Iraqi military should be disbanded, General Funk said some of the militias “have to be dealt with.”
He added, “There are groups that publicly threaten the coalition, and that needs to stop.” The militias were recruited and incorporated into the Iraqi military in 2014, when the Islamic State seized control of nearly a third of Iraq. They have been accused of attacking civilians in liberated areas.
In western Iraq, coalition forces continued mobilizing Wednesday for a planned assault that will begin soon, General Funk said. Iraqi security forces said Wednesday they had dropped leaflets intended for residents of the Rawa and Anah districts in western Iraq.
The leaflets instructed civilians to stay as far as possible from Islamic State fighters and to place white flags on rooftops once coalition forces begin attacking.
“We are coming to you,” the leaflets read, according to the Iraqi military. “God is with us in our last battle against the apostates of Daesh.”
In Syria, Syrian Democratic Force fighters supported by coalition airstrikes, artillery and intelligence, have advanced to the east side of the Euphrates River and attacked the Islamic State as far south as the Omar oil field east of the city of Mayadin, Colonel Dillon said. Mayadin is about 50 miles from the Iraq border.
Coalition-backed forces declared victory on Oct. 17 over the Islamic State in Raqqa, which had been claimed by the insurgents as the capital of their caliphate.
