‘How Did We Miss Him?’  Student Death Prompts Inquiries in New Zealand
The body of a male New Zealand college student went undiscovered in his room at a campus residence complex, possibly for weeks, according to local news reports.
The body was found Monday evening at a residence at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, according to a statement from the Christchurch Police. Specialist police teams were called in to assist with the formal identification of the student, whose name has not yet been released.
The police said they were investigating how long the student’s body had been in the residence, but would not say how they were alerted or when they believe the student had died.
The local news outlet Stuff, citing unnamed sources, reported that the student’s body could have been there for nearly two months, and that fellow students had not known anything was wrong until they noticed a smell and alerted the authorities. Officials declined to comment on those reports.
“How did we miss him?” John Schroder a spokesman for Campus Living Villages — the Australian company that runs the hall of residence the young man was found in — said in an interview with The New Zealand Herald, adding that the question had been haunting him.
“We owe it to our young student and his family to make sure that we can determine what actually happened and determine where there could have been a failure in process and indeed what we can do about it into the future,” he said.
He later said in an emailed statement that the type of accommodation offered at village was designed to give students “maximum independence.”
“As such, it doesn’t involve the automatic interactions and checks of a fully serviced hall or residence,” he added.
Mr. Schroder said the cause of the student’s death was a matter for the police, but the company would review its systems and processes to determine “why it took so long for the young man to be found.”
Cheryl de la Rey, the vice chancellor of the University of Canterbury, said in a statement that the university was “devastated” by the death of the student and was doing everything to support the police investigation.
“Despite the comprehensive pastoral care programmes in place, for us it is inconceivable to imagine how these circumstances could have occurred,” she said. “We understand that the matter is now with the coroner and we are respectful of the family’s wishes at this time not to comment further.”
She also noted that the university planned to commission its own investigation into the student’s death “to identify how this situation could have occurred and what actions need to be taken.”
Chris Hipkins, New Zealand’s education minister, said on Wednesday that he was troubled by the situation and that the university would be conducting a thorough investigation.
“No student should be left for that period of time unattended, uncared for, when they’re living in a hall of residence or a hostel,” Mr. Hipkins said, speaking to TVNZ. “Clearly there’s been quite a big failure here and if that means that things need to change to make sure this sort of thing doesn’t happen again in the future, then we will do that.”
The student’s body was discovered in a residence hall at the Sonoda Christchurch Campus, an area that caters to freshman students. The accommodation is made up of furnished five-bedroom apartments with single rooms. The student housing was also staffed by two residential assistants who were employed, with a duty manager, to support residents, according to Ms. de la Rey.
She also noted that shared social spaces and bathrooms in the facility were cleaned twice a week.
