Marine Le Pen Is Ordered to Stand Trial Over ISIS Tweets
PARIS — The French far-right leader Marine Le Pen has been ordered to stand trial in a criminal case involving graphic photographs of acts of violence by the Islamic State that she posted on Twitter in 2015.
Ms. Le Pen, the head of the National Rally party, formerly known as the National Front, has been charged under an article in the French penal code that prohibits “disseminating” messages that are “violent” or that could “seriously harm human dignity” and that could be seen by a minor, according to the prosecutor’s office in Nanterre, a western suburb of Paris.
If found guilty, she could face a maximum sentence of three years in prison and a fine of 75,000 euros, or about $85,000. The prosecutor’s office said on Thursday that a date for the trial had not been set, but that it would be held in Nanterre.
In 2015, when a television journalist compared her party to the Islamic State, Ms. Le Pen reacted angrily by posting three pictures on Twitter that showed killings by the group, including one of the decapitated body of James Foley, an American journalist.
Ms. Le Pen deleted that post after criticism from Mr. Foley’s family, but not the two other pictures, one that showed a man in an orange jumpsuit being run over by a tank and the other a prisoner being burned alive in a cage.
Ms. Le Pen’s publication of the pictures outraged France’s political class, and prosecutors opened an investigation. Before the case could proceed, her parliamentary immunity — both in France and, at the time, at the European Parliament — had to be lifted.
Laws regulating free speech in France are generally considered more restrictive than in the United States, and there are rules against calls to violence or hate speech. The act of publicly denying the Holocaust, for instance, is a criminal offense. In recent years, new laws have also criminalized speech that supports or justifies terrorism.
But there is also robust support for open and unfettered public debate, as shown by reactions to the attacks on the satirical weekly newspaper Charlie Hebdo in 2015.
Ms. Le Pen has said that the investigation into her Twitter posts is a political witch hunt aimed at silencing her. She says that the Twitter posts were meant to criticize the “outrageousness” of comparing her party to the Islamic State and that she is being wrongly prosecuted on charges normally meant to protect minors from violent propaganda or pornography.
Ms. Le Pen said on Twitter on Thursday that the proceedings against her were “shameful” and that they were a sign of “the state of moral and political decay of our leading ‘elites.’ ”
Ms. Le Pen is also facing charges in an investigation into whether the National Front misused funds at the European Parliament, although she has not been ordered to stand trial in that case. She had originally been charged only with breach of trust, but last year the investigative judges handling her case added the more serious charge of embezzlement.
The party is accused of putting staff members who did political work unrelated to the European Union on the European Parliament’s payroll by having them sign up as phony parliamentary aides, an accusation that other politicians and parties in France are also facing.
The National Rally came in first in European Parliament elections in France last month, and it forms part of a group of nationalist parties around Europe that are seeking to radically change the European Union from within. On Thursday, some of those euroskeptic and populist parties announced the creation of a group called Identity and Democracy in the European Parliament, replacing an older one called the Europe of Nations and Freedom.
The new group will hold 73 seats in the European Parliament, up from the 36 that the Europe of Nations and Freedom held. Its members include parties such as the National Rally, the League of Italy and Alternative for Germany.
