   The NCAA revealed its 68-team field Sunday. Now it's time to break everything down. 
   Chalk Talk: No. 1 Virginia 
   Circle the possible date of top-seeded Virginia versus No. 4 Arizona in the Sweet 16 as must-see basketball. Cavaliers coach Tony Bennett's Pack Line defense will be tested by the Pac 12 champions, especially star Deandre Ayton, who stands 7-foot-1. Virginia center Jack Salt, a 6-foot-10 New Zealander, will be charged with the task of absorbing blows from Ayton. Bennett's defensive ideology is what has the Wahoos ranked No. 1 overall in the bracket. After reaching the Elite 8 in 2016, this is the team that may lead Bennett to the Final Four. Arizona, led by Sean Miller, also seeking his first national semifinals, stands in the way. 
   The Slipper: Loyola-Chicago 
   Behind the leadership of fourth-year coach Porter Moser, the Ramblers dominated the Missouri Valley Conference this season, winning 15 of their 18 conference games before securing their NCAA Tournament bid with a blowout win over Illinois State in the conference title game last weekend. Their biggest win of the season came back in early December, when they handed then-No. 5 Florida a six-point loss in Gainesville — a huge road victory for a mid-major program. What's more, KenPom pins Loyola as a top-25 defensive team in the nation. The Ramblers, who last made the Big Dance in 1985 and won a national title in 1963, feature a balanced scoring attack, with five different players averaging double figures, four of whom are upperclassmen. 
   Lottery Ticket: Deandre Ayton 
   Ayton, a 7-1, 250-pound athletic freak, is the consensus to go No. 1 overall in the NBA Draft this spring. He's been Arizona's star in a tumultuous season off the court, leading the team in scoring (20.3 points per game), rebounding (11.5 per game) and blocks (1.9 per game) while shooting more than 60% from the field. Ayton has also shown range from downtown, hitting 12 of his 33 three attempts. NBA scouts love his versatile offensive game, length, agility, footwork and ability to run the floor. The 19-year-old has thrown down a slew of highlight-reel dunks this season and will be can't-miss television in the postseason. Ayton became the first freshman since Kevin Love in 2008 to take home Pac-12 Player of the Year honors. 
   Coach's Corner: Bob McKillop 
   Stephen Curry's old coach is back in the dance. McKillop, a member of the New York City Basketball Hall of Fame and former Long Island Lutheran coach, beat Danny Hurley's Rhode Island Rams in the Atlantic 10 title game Sunday in order to make it to the dance. The idea of McKillop Magic – he reached the Elite 8 with Curry – is what will keep Kentucky coach John Calipari up at night this week. 
   Scandal Squad: Arizona 
   The official missing person report is down to former assistant coach Emanuel (Book) Richardson, who has been fired for alleged bribery, but the Wildcats played one game without headman Sean Miller, as well. Miller and ESPN remain at odds about a report that Miller talked about paying center Deandre Ayton $100,000 to come to Tucson en route to the NBA. Ayton remains touted as a possible No. 1 pick overall. The Wildcats are back to being a potential title winner after claiming the PAC 12 tournament title Saturday night. 
   Local Flavor 
   Marques Townes; Loyola-Chicago 
   Loyola, the 1963 national champ, hasn't made the NCAA tournament since 1985, but they have tournament experience in the junior, who helped lead Fairleigh Dickinson to the tournament two years ago before transferring to play for the Ramblers. The second-leading scorer in St. Joseph (Metuchen, N.J.) HS history (behind Jay Williams), Townes averaged 11.2 points per game for Loyola. 
   Ty Jerome; Virginia 
   The 6-5 sophomore out of Iona Prep became an integral part of the Cavaliers run to the unanimous No. 1 ranking at the end of the regular season, starting every game and averaging 10.5 points per game, shooting nearly 40% from three-point range. He scored a career-high 31 points in a 59-58 win over Boston College on Dec. 30.   
