New Zealand Diplomat Censured for Vulgar Tweet About U.S. Democrats
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — New Zealand’s foreign ministry censured its second-ranking envoy to the United States on Wednesday after she tweeted that the Democratic Party in America should get its act together “or we will all die.”
Caroline Beresford, New Zealand’s deputy high commissioner to the United States, and second in charge to the ambassador, Tim Groser, has since made her Twitter account private, with the news website Newsroom reporting that her tweets had been deleted.
Responding to an opinion piece from the politics website The Hill, titled “A Sanders-Warren ticket could win big in 2020,” Ms. Beresford responded on Twitter, “No it couldn’t.”
“Please get your” — and here she used an expletive — “together or we will all die,” she wrote. That was apparently in response to the suggestion that two senators, Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, could form a presidential ticket for the 2020 election to defeat President Trump.
The two senators are among the most liberal in Congress and have fervent supporters, but some Democrats fear that putting them on a presidential ticket would turn off moderate voters.
Minutes before her provocative tweet, Ms. Beresford tweeted about the same article in The Hill, saying of Democrats, “They’ve learned nothing.”
A spokesman for New Zealand’s foreign minister, Winston Peters, said he had been advised of the matter Wednesday, and was “confident the ministry is responding in an appropriate way.”
Discussing Ms. Beresford’s acts, New Zealand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade said that there were “very clear expectations of staff” that they “maintain political neutrality and care in expressing personal opinion” when making public comment, and that had “not been met” in this case.
“The ministry does not in any way endorse the content or tone of the tweets, which we note were deleted,” a spokeswoman said, adding the ministry was taking “appropriate action.”
Ms. Beresford did not respond to a request for comment. She earlier confirmed to the Newsroom website that she had personally sent the tweets, but “realized very quickly that they were inappropriate, which is why I deleted them.”
