A Taliban Commander’s Double Life, in a War He Couldn’t Leave Behind
SURKHROD, Afghanistan — In one life, he was Zabet Khan, a 25-year-old with a high school diploma, four children and a fondness for taking photos with his pink selfie stick.
In the other, he was Commander Zarqawi, a Taliban veteran in eastern Afghanistan with 10 years of combat experience in a war he couldn’t break away from. Even after he went as far as Greece in search of a job, the war sucked him back in.
Mr. Khan’s life by the gun, and his death in a mysterious parcel bombing last August, point to how complex the Afghan insurgency has become as the United States tries to negotiate its way out of the long war.
Over 18 years, the Taliban’s ideological movement has intertwined with local rivalries, blood feuds and a thriving black market. And it may have seen a divide open up between some young fighters, like Mr. Khan, and the Taliban’s more dogmatic leadership.
Signs of that divide emerged during a rare cease-fire last year, where some Taliban fighters openly disobeyed the limitations set by their leaders. Since then, the insurgent leadership has resisted all the calls by American negotiators and Afghan leaders for another cease-fire, with senior insurgent leaders privately saying that a new truce could have disastrous ramifications to their only leverage in an endgame — battlefield momentum.
That divide, family members believe, led to his murder.
“My son was killed by the Taliban — no one but the Taliban,” said Mr. Khan’s father, Aref Khan, 70. “They killed him because he stopped working with them.”
Commander Zarqawi had tried at least twice to end his insurgency — to become Zabet Khan again.
The oldest of four brothers, he picked up arms with the Taliban when he was in the eighth grade, around 2008. The American military had a nearby outpost; every time troops left the base, fighters like Mr. Khan tried to ambush them.
Yet during the day, Mr. Khan rarely missed class at his local school, which was run by the government and funded by international donors.
His fellow students were largely unaware of the insurgent among them until Mr. Khan became a unit leader around 10th or 11th grade, taking Commander Zarqawi as his nom de guerre. The revelation didn’t alarm his classmates, said one of them, Sayad Jalal.
“The school was a government school, but the area was Taliban — everyone had a Talib in their family,” he said.
When Mr. Khan graduated and got married, he started thinking about how to change his life.
In 2014, when American troops started leaving his district, Khogyani, as part of President Barack Obama’s withdrawal of combat forces, he thought his share of the war was over. He was reluctant to attack the Afghan soldiers who replaced the Americans, which did not go over well with his Taliban leaders, Mr. Khan’s family and friends say.
So he joined the migrant trail to Europe, arriving in Greece in 2014 in search of a job.
For much of his three years there, he worked on a family farm on Crete, helping to grow vegetables and get them to local markets. The Greek family he worked for had an easy nickname for him: Ali.
Fearing deportation, Mr. Khan largely kept to the farm and the nearby town. But sometimes he made it as far as Athens to explore.
In pictures from those days, the Taliban fighter looks like any other young migrant, at once in awe and at ease in a new world, with a short beard and spiked hair. For a village boy and Talib, he looks comfortable with women, his elbows gently resting on their shoulders in photos.
But the long war at home dragged on, and dragged him back. Friends urged him to stay in Greece, but he said he was homesick and didn’t like the cat-and-mouse game with the police.
Soon enough, he was back to his assault rifle and the couple of dozen insurgents he commanded, and back to the equivalent of $90 that the Taliban paid him each month in Pakistani currency. He grew his beard out again and wore his hair curled long behind his ears, as shown in photos he took with his selfie stick from Greece.
After his travels, he was an odd kind of insurgent, clearly as much in battle with his own motives as with the enemy. After he arrested Afghan soldiers or police officers, he would often set them free.
“He thought his war was over,” his cousin Shirin Khan said, referring to his 2014 departure. “When he came back from Greece, we told him not to pick up arms again. He said he had no choice — there would be problems for him if he didn’t.”
The problems came to a head last summer, when Mr. Khan had been back for more than a year.
A rare thing happened in the bloody war: the Taliban and the Afghan government declared an overlapping three-day cease-fire for the Muslim festival Eid al-Fitr. The news media’s coverage was filled with images of Taliban and regular Afghans mingling happily — Commander Zarqawi among them.
“This is one of the best memories of my life,” he said in an Afghan television interview that spread far and wide on social media. “The government people treated us well. At every check post, they congratulated us on Eid, and we would congratulate them back.”
For the first time in nine years, he said, he had visited a famous spot near Jalalabad where families came for hand-churned ice cream.
“It was 1 a.m. when we returned from ice cream and we roamed Jalalabad city,” the young commander said. “I still haven’t slept from happiness.”
But he had crossed a line. The Taliban leadership had made it clear: During the cease-fire, no fighters should leave their rural strongholds to venture into cities. At this crucial stage of the war, the leaders wanted to make sure their fighters were not softened by what they might see there.
Commander Zarqawi went back to his fighters, his cousin Shirin said.
“But he kept talking about other options — about returning to Greece,” he said.
Within weeks, he was dead.
Lured to a grocery store where he bought provisions, he was blown up by a parcel bomb that had been left for him with the teenage shopkeeper, who was also killed. From across the street, Mr. Khan’s father saw the store explode.
“I didn’t know my son was there, but someone else shouted that Zarqawi was there,” he said. “I felt I was drowning.”
Friends, family members and even a Taliban commander suggested that the killing was the insurgents’ own doing. Mr. Khan had gotten admonishing phone calls from Taliban leaders based in Pakistan, suggesting that they may have wanted to make an example of him.
And there was another clue: Every time a Taliban fighter is killed, the insurgency gives his family compensation worth about $700. Commander Zarqawi was no ordinary fighter, but a respected unit commander of more than 20 men. Yet his family got nothing.
In an interview, Zabihullah Mujahid, the Taliban’s spokesman, denied that the group had killed Mr. Khan. He said the area had been infiltrated by the Islamic State, who are fighting a turf war with the Taliban, and that the killing could have been their doing.
“He wasn’t the only one who participated in the cease-fire. There were a lot of people, and none of them have been threatened,” Mr. Mujahid said. “Besides, for an issue like this, the punishment wouldn’t be death.”
On the morning of his death, Commander Zarqawi performed a final service for one of his fighters — a student like he had once been, at the same school. The boy was afraid he would fail an exam, and the commander asked his teacher for leniency. The teacher refused.
“The teacher recently told me, ‘I wish I had told him yes, I would give his man a great grade,’” his cousin Shirin recounted. “‘So this pain that he died unhappy with me wouldn’t have bothered me so much.’”
