Pentagon Ends Review of Deadly Niger Ambush, Again Blaming Junior Officers
WASHINGTON — Acting Defense Secretary Patrick Shanahan has effectively closed the book on a lengthy Pentagon investigation into a deadly ambush in Niger in 2017, officials said on Wednesday, approving a high-level review of earlier findings that mostly blamed junior officers.
Over the demands of lawmakers and family members to hold more senior commanders accountable, Mr. Shanahan accepted the conclusions of an Army general he had appointed early April to take a new look at the ill-fated operation that killed four Army soldiers.
In the end, Gen. Robert Brown endorsed earlier inquiries by the military’s Africa and Special Operations commands that led to reprimands for eight Army Green Berets and a two-star Air Force general.
But other officers in the chain of command escaped punishment, including a Green Beret colonel who was responsible for Special Operations missions in northwest Africa at the time.
The father of Staff Sgt. Dustin M. Wright, one of the soldiers killed, said in an interview on Wednesday that he was infuriated with the final review’s conclusions.
“I’m on the damn warpath,” said the father, Arnold Wright, adding that he would urge Congress to investigate further. “There’s more to come on this. The Army does actually think it’s closed. It’s just getting started.”
Military officials briefed Mr. Wright and other relatives of the dead soldiers at Fort Bragg, N.C., and elsewhere on Wednesday. Mr. Wright said he was frustrated by the time it took — 20 months — to complete the review that he believed ended without military officials being fully forthcoming.
“They continued the party line stuff today,” he said.
Representative Ruben Gallego, an Arizona Democrat and a former Marine on the House Armed Services Committee, said on Wednesday that largely blaming junior officers was “a shirking of responsibility.”
When American troops go into combat, Mr. Gallego said, “they need to trust that they have the right equipment, that the mission has been properly thought through and vetted and that their superior officers are not going to abandon them if the going gets tough.”
[Sign up for the weekly At War newsletter to receive stories about duty, conflict and consequence.]
Mr. Shanahan defended the military’s manifold inquiries into an incident that left a small team of underequipped and poorly supported American soldiers in the African scrub to be overrun by more than 100 fighters loyal to the Islamic State.
“I am satisfied that all findings, awards, and accountability actions were thorough and appropriate,” he said in a statement.
The deaths of the four soldiers — Sgt. First Class Jeremiah W. Johnson, Staff Sgt. Bryan C. Black, Sgt. La David Johnson and Sergeant Wright — set off a fierce debate over secretive American military missions in remote and far-flung battlegrounds that accelerated a drawdown of American commandos in western Africa.
Nearly two years after the ambush — the American military’s largest loss of life in combat in Africa since the 1993 “Black Hawk Down” debacle in Somalia — top military leaders have continued to struggle over how to apportion blame and who should be held accountable. Several rank-and-file Green Berets complained privately that top officers were not held accountable.
The completion of General Brown’s review cleared the way on Wednesday for the families of fallen soldiers to receive their awards for valor — Silver or Bronze Stars — as well as redacted copies of the initial investigation, which was conducted by the Africa Command. Between recommendations and approval, the Army decided to issue lesser medals to some soldiers with little explanation, according to an Army officer familiar with the case.
That investigation, the results of which were described in May 2018 in an unclassified executive summary, found widespread problems across all levels of the military counterterrorism operation. But it focused in particular on the actions of junior officers leading up to the ambush, which also killed four Nigerien soldiers and an interpreter.
The Pentagon provided copies of the 176-page redacted report to reporters on Wednesday. It contained no major revelations beyond the executive summary, but offered new details from a military account that has been halting and inconsistent, in public and in private, since the first days after the firefight.
American commanders initially described the operation as a routine reconnaissance mission. In fact, the 11-member team, working far from base and lacking air support, was ambushed by more than 100 militants aligned with the Islamic State after superior officers twice changed its mission to one that carried far greater risks.
Capt. Michael Perozeni, the leader of the Green Beret team that was ambushed, had told his commanders that his team of Americans and Nigeriens did not have the necessary equipment or intelligence to divert the mission for an unplanned raid on a local militant, and had asked to return to base, according to a classified part of the inquiry.
Instead, Lt. Col. David Painter, a battalion commander based in Chad, ordered Captain Perozeni’s team to continue. Investigators later concluded that Colonel Painter and other senior officers failed to assess the risk of sending the ill-prepared team on such a hazardous mission, according to the redacted report that identified Colonel Painter by his title, but not by name.
Colonel Painter’s order failed to take into account that Captain Perozeni’s team had gone “nearly 24 hours with little rest,” had no reinforcements standing by if danger struck and had no plan to evacuate wounded troops under fire, according to the redacted report.
Colonel Painter was ultimately punished for improperly overseeing predeployment training. But two military officials on Wednesday said he is expected to be promoted to the rank of full colonel in the coming months.
Eight other people have been punished as a result of the ambush, Pentagon officials said on Wednesday, including Maj. Gen. J. Marcus Hicks, the head of Special Operations forces in Africa, who had been previously scheduled to retire in the coming weeks.
Col. Bradley D. Moses, then the commander of the 3rd Special Forces Group, is the only person in the Special Operations chain of command involved in the ambush who remains unpunished. The redacted report indicated Colonel Moses, who was based in Germany at the time, was briefed on the planning to redirect Captain Perozeni’s team to the riskier mission.
Colonel Moses is currently the chief of staff of Army Special Operations Command and, according to Defense Department officials, is scheduled to take a staff job in Afghanistan in coming weeks. A rising star in the Army Special Forces community, Colonel Moses is widely considered to be in line to be promoted to brigadier general, a promotion that requires Senate confirmation.
Captain Perozeni, who was put in command of the Green Beret unit — Team 3212 — just weeks before it deployed to Niger, was reprimanded twice. In both cases, however, he successfully appealed the punishments, and Army commanders twice rescinded them.
Despite claims to the contrary by senior Pentagon officials, some Special Forces officers have privately said the Army has done little since the 2017 ambush to reform personnel policies and unrealistic training and deployment timelines.
Mr. Wright, the father of Sergeant Wright and himself a former soldier who can trace the family’s lineage in the armed services to the War of 1812, said he had grown disgusted by the military’s handling of the ambush.
“There’s no way in good confidence I could encourage anyone to join the United States Army right now, and our family goes back over 200 years,” he said.
