SYDNEY, Australia — For decades she has blazed a trail in the Australian media, bringing the news to homes around the country. But on Monday, Lisa Wilkinson herself became the subject of the day’s breaking news, her resignation reigniting a fierce debate about a gender pay gap, an issue that has increasingly roiled the media industry.
“I’m sad to say that today was my last day on ‘The Today Show,’” Ms. Wilkinson wrote on Twitter late Monday, referring to Nine Network’s flagship breakfast program, which she had co-hosted for a decade.
Her post contained a statement from the network confirming the split, which came after months of contract negotiations. “We have been unable to meet the expectations of Lisa Wilkinson and her manager on a contract renewal for a further period,” the network statement said, adding that it was “disappointed we find ourselves in this position.”
News of her abrupt departure set off speculation that Ms. Wilkinson, 57, had quit over an equal pay dispute. She had for 10 years been a co-host alongside Karl Stefanovic and at times had fended off questions about a pay gap between the two.
Australian news outlets have reported that Mr. Stefanovic was paid nearly twice as much as Ms. Wilkinson. Ms. Wilkinson, who is also the editor at large for HuffPost’s Australian arm, has not responded to requests for comment.
Within an hour of announcing her split from Nine Network, Ms. Wilkinson revealed that she had been snapped up by the rival Network Ten, which is being purchased by the CBS Corporation, the American broadcaster.
She will join “The Project,” Network Ten’s top news and current affairs program, starting next year, Ten said. The deal could make her the highest-paid female host on Australian television, local news reports said.
Her departure comes as other news outlets have been facing questions about gender pay disparities. In July, the BBC released pay data showing that women represented only one-third of the on-air talent who were paid at least 150,000 pounds, or about $200,000, by the broadcaster in the past year.
Ms. Wilkinson’s move drew praise from leading women across the media industry.
“What a woman. Lisa Wilkinson taking a stand for women everywhere by asking for equal pay with her co-host and walking when Channel Nine refused,” wrote Mia Freedman, co-founder of the women’s media company Mamamia. “Now she has a better deal at Channel 10.”
Her departure from Nine Network also drew the attention of prominent politicians.
“If the reason is about equal pay, I say good on her,” said Gladys Berejiklian, the premier of New South Wales. “I think she’s sending a very strong message to the community.”
Nine Network acknowledged Ms. Wilkinson’s contribution to “The Today Show,” saying that her partnership with Mr. Stefanovic had “taken the show to the success it is today.”
The pair embodied the easygoing Australian character with lighthearted banter and moments of mutual appreciation, with Ms. Wilkinson playing the calm, composed foil to Mr. Stefanovic’s regular tomfoolery.
Before hiring Ms. Wilkinson in 2007, Nine Network cycled through various co-hosts for Mr. Stefanovic to chip away at the popularity of “Sunrise,” the long-dominant breakfast show on Seven Network.
After Ms. Wilkinson joined “The Today Show,” its audience gradually increased, although not enough to overtake “Sunrise.”
“It was a stunning turnaround for a program many had written off a decade earlier,” wrote Michael Lallo, an entertainment reporter for Fairfax Media. “This should have been sufficient proof of Wilkinson’s value.”
Mr. Stefanovic opened the show Tuesday morning by acknowledging his shock at the departure of Ms. Wilkinson and thanking her for her support, citing “the laughs, sage advice, the calmness.”
“For 10 years Lisa has dragged herself out of bed at 3:30 in the morning, fed the dogs and cats, put a load of washing on, and come into work and sat on my left to inform you at home about what’s happening in the world,” Mr. Stefanovic said.
Nine Network said it would be “going in another direction” and considering its options over “the coming weeks and months.”
On Monday, Ms. Wilkinson was described by a fellow anchor, Leigh Sales of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, as a “steady, consistent, highly competent, warm and delightful presence” on “The Today Show.”
