Something to Wine About  The wonders of Côtes de Bordeaux 
   Recently, I was a guest of the Union des Côtes de Bordeaux for an educational journey through this breathtaking wine region. 
   Most wine drinkers are familiar with Bordeaux wines, but might wonder, what is the Côtes de Bordeaux? 
   The Cotes de Bordeaux is a hilly area in Bordeaux. 
   One way to think of the Côtes de Bordeaux is to first compare New York State to the larger region of Bordeaux. New York City is a smaller region of New York State, like the Côtes de Bordeaux is a smaller region in Bordeaux. 
   Within New York City we have five boroughs, all with their own unique characteristics: Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island. And within the Côtes de Bordeaux there are five equally distinct regions: Blaye, Sainte-Foy, Castillon, Cadillac and Francs. 
   If the name of the smaller region is on a wine's label it lets the consumer know that the wine was produced according to the specifications of the INAO, or the Institut National des Appellations d'Origine, for that region. 
   You might wonder why vineyards are limited on what they can label Côtes de Bordeaux. One reason is an effort to both respect and best represent, even celebrate, the different regions' terroir. 
   Terroir is the land in a specific place, at a specific time — vines growing in a certain area, under that year's unique weather circumstances. 
   While vineyards are limited on what they can label Cotes de Bordeaux, they can also produce certain wines, like Rosé, and dry whites, under the more general Bordeaux AOC. Chateaux Carbonneau, for example, has a lovely Rosé named Lulu, after the proprietor's daughter. 
   Merlot is one of the Côtes de Bordeaux's most predominant grapes. The winemakers of the Côtes de Bordeaux are careful with Merlot, wanting it to be neither overripe or over-oaked. It's most often a delicate, round expression of the grape with lovely soft tannins. 
   Before I give some examples of a couple of my favorite wines from each region I must mention three producers I found to be flawless. Wine after wine, vintage after vintage, there was only new expressions of complete awesomeness. If you see the names of their chateaus on your local shelves, and the wine falls within your price range for the occasion, buy it. And if it doesn't fall within your price range-consider splurging. It'll be money well spent. 
   Chateau de Pitray 
   Jean de Boigne, creating wine for Chateaux Pitray, Cotes de Bordeaux Castillon, shares my passion for a severely underrated grape, Cabernet franc. While other Bordeaux winemakers are content to have Cabernet franc play a supporting role in their blends, de Boigne allows it to star. 
   Masculine, while still being both suave and sophisticated, de Boigne's Cabernet franc is the Cary Grant of varietals. I sampled year after year of his creations and while all were unique, they were all the perfect representation of their vintage and they all paired wonderfully with food. And, under the broader Bordeaux appellation he also creates a simply perfect Rosé. 
   Château Poupille 
   Philippe Carrille, like Jean de Boigne, can also do no wrong. Year after year of his wine was opened and all were eye-opening. When tasting a vintage from 1988, I was stunned. Carrille is a couple of years younger than me. Yet in 1988, while I was in my early 20s and obsessed with Madonna and hair spray, he was busy creating a world class wine that aged beautifully nearly three decades later. Chateau Poupille is located in Cotes de Bordeaux Castillon. 
   Chateau Couronneau 
   Christophe Piat, of Chateau Couronneau, Cotes de Bordeaux Sainte-Foy, creates organic and biodynamic wine. His strive towards innovation in farming, fermentation and crafting wine is inspiring. 
   He utilizes oak, stainless steel, and clay amphoras in the production of his wine. The respect he shows the land with his farming methods, as well as the grape during fermentation, is evident as each of his wines celebrate the terroir of Sainte-Foy beautifully. While Piat's red wines are labeled Sainte-Foy, he also produces enchanting whites under the general Bordeaux AOC. 
   Blaye Cotes de Bordeaux 
   Château Magdeleine Bouhou- La Boha 2014: The is an unoaked red blend that has notes of strawberry licorice on the nose. The wine is resplendent with ripe red fruit and smooth tannins. Lovely on its own or with soft cheese. $17.90 
   Chateau L'Escadre Major 2015: Exquisite floral nose. This is a seamless, substantial red, without being overly heavy. $50 
   Chateau Dubraud 2016: This is a lovely dry white crafted in stainless steel and made from Semillon, Sauvignon blanc and Muscadelle. $16 
   Chateau Pey-Bonhomme-les-Tours le blanc 2016: This dry, white, biodynamic wine is half Sauvignon blanc and half Semillon and all delicious. $15 
   Both Chateau Dubraud and Chateau Pey-Bonhomme-les-Tours also produce lovely reds, but with red wine being so dominant in the region the beautiful white wines of the area truly stand out. 
   Château Les Jouberts "Cuvée Prestige" Rouge 2014: A 12-month fermentation in oak gives you a very easy drinking, medium bodied Merlot. $15 
   Château Les Jouberts "Cuvée Prestige" Blanc 2015: Another wonderful white. A lovely round Sauvignon blanc fermented for six months in oak. While still fruity, far less aggressive than New Zealand Sauvignon blancs. $13 
   Cadillac Cotes de Bordeaux 
   Chateau Brethous 2015: A stunning organic and biodynamic red wine. I actually sampled a number of their wines and each one illustrated how wonderful the 2015 vintage is. $16 
   Chateau La Rame La Charmille2015: Another lovely Cotes de Bordeaux expression that truly illustrates what a spectacular year 2015 was for the Cadillac region. $21 
   Castillon Cotes de Bordeaux 
   While Chateau Pitray and Chateaux Poupille are my top two in this area. I also enjoyed L'Authentique 2016 from Chateau Moulin De Clotte. This is a delightfully delicious, light, fruity red wine without added sulfites. $19 
   Sainte-Foy Cotes de Bordeaux 
   Chateau Hostens-Picant LUCULLUS Cuvee D'Exception 2014: A big, bold red with an incredible nose of earth, wood and fruit. On the palate rich, dark red fruit and a long satisfying finish. And the eye-catching label truly suits the wine inside. $45-$50 
   Château Hostens-Picant Cuvée des Demoiselles 2015 A lively Sauvignon blanc, Semillon blend. A beautiful expression of Sainte-Foy terroir in white. $23-$25 
   Francs Cotes de Bordeaux 
   Chateau Franc Cardinal 2012: A smoky campfire nose, beautiful legs, rich red fruits, full of elegance and structure, this delicious wine drinks like a very high-end wine, yet I've seen it for sale online at under $20 a bottle. This vineyard is in the process of receiving organic status so more upcoming vintages may be marked as organic. Normally, it retails at $40, and is well worth it. 
   Chateau Nardou 2010: An approachable, easy drinking, deliciously food friendly red. This wine paired remarkably well, with cheese, vegetables, meats-pretty much anything on the table. Definitely a consistent go-to, wine. $15-$20 
   And while it is released under the more general Bordeaux appellation I must mention Nardou's cremant, a stunning Crémant Rosé. Soft, round and lovely, it's an absolutely gorgeous wine to celebrate with. $15-$20 
   Linda Delmonico Prussen is a Long Island-based award-winning journalist passionate about all things wine. 
   For more DAILY VIEWS, The News' contributor network, click here.    
