AUCKLAND, New Zealand — When Jacinda Ardern took the podium in Parliament on Thursday night, just over an hour after the startling announcement that she would be New Zealand’s next prime minister, she was smiling and assured but appeared somewhat stunned. Afterward, she said, she returned to her nearby studio apartment in the capital, Wellington, and “ate a pot of noodles.”
On Friday morning, she faced the news media as the prime minister-designate of New Zealand, 27 days after the country’s election. She is the third woman to lead the country, and, at 37, its youngest leader in more than 150 years.
“I think I’ll take time to reflect on this moment, and indeed, the campaign — when Christmas arrives,” she told Radio New Zealand.
For a woman who only became leader of New Zealand’s center-left Labour Party 10 weeks ago, her swift ascension to leader of the country was, according to former Prime Minister Helen Clark, “extraordinary.”
Promising change and a “fairer deal” for marginalized New Zealanders, Ms. Ardern invigorated progressive and young voters and reversed the fortunes of the Labour Party. Its woeful position around 24 percent in the polls helped force out the previous leader, Andrew Little, but Ms. Ardern led the party to a respectable 36.9 percent in the election on Sept. 23.
An unassuming figure, she is known for her past D.J. sets and installing her own toilet — to the chagrin of New Zealand’s plumbers — but is also a confessed policy “geek” who worked for years in the New Zealand and British Labour movements and headed a socialist organization before becoming a lawmaker in 2008.
During the campaign, Ms. Ardern became an unintentional feminist hero when she batted away an interviewer’s question about whether she would have babies if she became prime minister. This week, a talk radio host called her a “chicky-babe.”
In her trademark no-nonsense fashion, Ms. Clark — also the former head of the United Nations Development Program — said that Ms. Ardern had received “more than her fair share of very silly comments” during the campaign but voiced hope that New Zealanders would now “let her get on with the job” of governing.
In New Zealand, political parties must band together to form a coalition government if no party wins enough seats to govern outright. Labour did not win the most seats in the September election; that distinction went to the center-right National Party, led by the incumbent prime minister, Bill English.
But National did not win enough to govern alone, and the decision about who would become prime minister was left to the eccentric, populist leader of a minor party, Winston Peters of New Zealand First.
Weeks of negotiations followed before Mr. Peters threw his weight behind Ms. Ardern on Thursday night. Neither she nor her rival knew Mr. Peters’s decision before he announced it on live television.
Describing herself as “relentlessly optimistic,” Ms. Ardern will now face a National opposition of 56 members clamoring at the gates — smarting from losing an election they believed they had won — and must hold together a three-party governing deal, while also delivering on the change she promised.
The morning after her ascension, at a girls’ high school not far away from Parliament, final-year students were buzzing at the prospect.
Mia Faiumu, 18, and Narjis al-Zaidi, 17, two leaders of the feminist club at the school, Wellington East Girls’ College, hoped Ms. Ardern would improve the national curriculum for sex and consent education as well as decriminalize abortion, as she had promised (abortion is permissible in New Zealand with a doctor’s approval but remains illegal).
“She understands what it’s like to be a young woman today,” said Ms. Faiumu, who voted for Labour in this, her first, election. Before Ms. Ardern’s rise to leader, she said, her vote would have gone to the further-left Green Party, which will support Labour to pass its laws.
But she had been “hooked in by Jacindamania,” she said, using the term coined by the news media to describe the new leader’s ardent fans.
“Anyone who is marginalized would know that New Zealand isn’t the most progressive country if you’re not well-off or a man,” Ms. al-Zaidi said, adding that she thought Ms. Ardern would change that.
The young women enthused about Ms. Ardern’s “big vision,” saying they felt empowered by her win in spite of critics’ saying she could not deliver on such bold ideas.
The expectations for Ms. Ardern now are stacked high: from action on child poverty to solving a housing crisis and an increase in homelessness, she must also balance farming interests — the mainstay of New Zealand’s export market — with her party’s promise to clean up waterways and take action on climate change.
Ms. Clark, the former prime minister — whose office once employed a younger Ms. Ardern — said she believed it was “absolutely realistic” that the new prime minister could fill such a tall order, particularly in resolving the housing crisis, which she called a “disaster.”
In announcing his preference to have Ms. Ardern lead the country, the minor party leader, Mr. Peters, said that capitalism had failed the poorest New Zealanders.
A populist who has traditionally run on an anti-immigration platform, Mr. Peters said Ms. Ardern’s party was the one to steer New Zealand away from neoliberalism, favored by the National Party, which had governed New Zealand for the past nine years.
But some analysts questioned how radical Ms. Ardern’s economic agenda really was. The prominent economist Ganesh Nana said that far from a socialist figure in the mold of Bernie Sanders, Ms. Ardern was offering a fairly mainstream fiscal plan unlikely to be seen as upending capitalism in New Zealand.
“Labour’s policies didn’t change in the leadership transfer from Andrew Little to Jacinda Ardern,” Mr. Nana said. “They just found someone who could sell them.”
He predicted some elements of social and economic change would emerge under Ms. Ardern’s leadership.
“I think it will change the tenor of the discussion and debate about the balance between the haves and have-nots,” he said. “Will it be enough to satisfy progressives who voted for her? We’ll have to wait and see.”
Previous New Zealand coalition governments had proved fractious at times, and Ms. Clark, who has run three of them, said it was crucial to establish regular communication between party leaders so that no partner in the deal was left surprised. She said that aligned with Ms. Ardern’s strongest suit.
“She communicates a lot of empathy with people, and that makes her a very inclusive person,” Ms. Clark said. “She gives people the impression — and I think it’s a reality — that she’s interested in them.”
In Wellington on Friday, women’s advocates were waiting to hear how Ms. Ardern would use those skills to advance their agenda.
Citing New Zealand’s relatively high domestic violence rates and the fact that Parliament was still only 38 percent female, the president of the National Council of Women, Vanisa Dhiru, said Ms. Ardern’s appointment did not necessarily mean a victory for gender equality.
“In some ways, not enough has changed from 1893, when New Zealand first gave women the vote,” she said, mentioning sexual violence and the gender pay gap. “We need stronger initiatives and plans to move the dial for women.”
