Here’s the right time to get a flu shot, according to doctors
   It may not be flu season yet, but it’s about to be flu shot season. 
   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend that everyone 6 months of age and older get a flu shot — “with rare exception" — and October is the optimal time, according to a medical expert. 
   “Certainly there have been seasons of influenza that have been variable, but typically the influenza season picks up after Thanksgiving and the December holidays,” Dr. Paul Auwaerter, clinical director for the Division of Infectious Diseases at Johns Hopkins Hospital, told the Daily News. 
   Auwaerter said the season is usually really active around January, February or March and then declines — although the peak can come earlier or later. While it varies in severity and timing from year-to-year, trends can help form recommendations of when the best time is to get a vaccine. 
   “Because of the typical seasonality ... the optimal time to get a vaccination is October because it takes 2-4 weeks for the peak antibody levels” to build up in a person’s body. 
   Those antibodies will “persist and decline” over time to fight against the influenza virus, he said. 
   Between 37.4 million and 42.9 million people were infected with the flu during the 2018-2019 season, resulting in up to 20.1 million medical visits, 647,000 hospitalizations and 61,200 deaths, according to the CDC. 
   Auwaerter emphasized what is most important is not timing, but just that people get vaccinated to protect themselves and those around them. 
   “The flu shot may not be wholly protective, but it also can help you prevent from spreading it to other people in your household or at work,” Auwaerter said. 
   Each year, the flu vaccine can range from 10% to 60% effective — but Auwaerter said even if it’s not perfect, “having gotten an influenza immunization has seriously lowered” risk of things like being hospitalized or even dying from the flu. 
   Dr. Peter Palese, Chair of the Department of Microbiology at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, told The News that experts work each year to try and pinpoint what strains of the virus will be most prevalent in the U.S. to develop the vaccine. 
   Doctors follow the flu strains that circulate in the Southern Hemisphere — in places such as New Zealand and Australia — during their winter months while it’s summer in the U.S. to form the vaccine. Although it’s hard to predict exactly what strains will circulate and when the peak of the season will be, Palese said the flu shot “is really better than what people think,” and can be effective at protecting people. 
   Palese said that everyone who falls within the CDC recommendations should “absolutely” get a flu shot. 
   “The vaccine is much better than its reputation,” Palese told The News, emphasizing that those who may contract the flu after having a vaccine have much less severe symptoms that those who weren’t vaccinated. 
   Experts say that while the shot is not 100% effective against the virus, it helps people protect themselves and others while reducing symptoms, so it’s important to get vaccinated. 
   “Until we have better vaccines, this is what we have, and it is effective,” Auwaerter said. “Do it to protect yourself and other people.”   
