Civilians Emerge From Mosul’s Rubble Starving, Injured and Traumatized
A woman ran through an alley in Mosul’s Old City with two babies clutched to her chest and two small children following closely behind, grabbing for her skirt.
The family was among hundreds of civilians emerging from the rubble of the besieged neighborhood on Monday as Iraqi Special Forces went door-to-door clearing homes. The evacuations are part of a final bid to wrest the last pockets of the city still controlled by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, from the hands of extremists.
Many who remained in the militant-controlled areas of the city are injured and malnourished, according to aid groups.
Some have been hiding in basements for weeks as the fierce fighting between the Iraqi military and Islamic State forces raged around them.
Last month, the United Nations warned that thousands were being used as human shields by the militants as their grip on the city loosened.
Supplies have dwindled as the U.S.-backed Iraqi mission to retake the city escalated, and the risk from airstrikes and Islamic State snipers made it impossible for some to flee.
“People don’t have access to water or food supplies,” Bruno Geddo, head of the United Nations refugee agency in Iraq, said in an interview. The food remaining in the city was seized by Islamic State militants, according to recent escapees. “People have told us they were eating grass, so things are really desperate.”
Others were injured and had to be carried down city streets.
The refugee agency, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, is among several organizations providing aid to those displaced from the city in nearby humanitarian camps. Mr. Geddo said Mosul’s displaced residents were often “totally emotionally and physically exhausted" by the time they made it to the camps, whether by escape or military evacuation.
“Whenever we receive people from there, they look aghast,” Mr. Geddo said. “Like someone who has gone through an experience like hell.”
In late June, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq declared an end to the Islamic State’s self-declared caliphate, and a near-end to the fight for Mosul, even as fierce street battles continued.
For residents of the city, their plight has just begun, Mr. Geddo said.
Fierce and prolonged fighting has left portions of the city uninhabitable, meaning a swift return to some neighborhoods will be impossible. And even after the Islamic State’s defeat, the Iraqi forces face the arduous task of clearing the city of improvised explosive devices and booby traps left behind by the Islamic State.
“I cannot see how, with such a level of destruction, they could return immediately,” Mr. Geddo said.
Drone footage of the Old City of Mosul taken on Monday showed a city in ruin. Thick smoke filled the air from several fires burning on the ground, and building teetered on broken walls. Much of the damage has been done by airstrikes, but Islamic State fighters have also been destroying landmarks as they are pushed out of the city.
The Islamic State seized Mosul — Iraq’s second-largest city — in a sudden offensive in mid-2014 that left a huge swath of the country under its control.
After assaults on several other cities held by the militants, including Tikrit and Ramadi, the government offensive to reclaim Mosul formally began eight months ago, after weeks of maneuvering.
Now, the fight seems to be nearing its end.
But questions remain about the fate of hundreds of thousands forced from their homes by the battle.
Aid groups working with civilians displaced by the fighting say that those that have managed to escape or be evacuated by the Iraqi military come to camps malnourished and often are injured from the battle raging around them.
Civilians have long been caught between Islamic State snipers, who target those trying to leave, and heavy bombardment from Iraqi and coalition forces.
Civilians who do try to leave the areas of the city still under Islamic State control are stringently vetted by the military.
Photos from Monday’s evacuations show men stripped to their underwear to show special forces that they were not carrying explosives.
More than 900,000 people have been displaced by the fighting for Mosul, according to the refugee agency.
Aid groups in the region lack the resources to deal with the those who suffered the most severe deprivation and violence under the Islamic State, Mr. Geddo said.
“Its like coming back from the afterworld and so we are doing everything we can, but to be honest I don’t think we have the tools with his level of trauma,” Mr. Geddo said. “They have seen unspeakable violence.”
