Emirates and Turkish Airlines Say Laptop Ban Is Lifted on Their U.S. Flights
Emirates and Turkish Airlines said on Wednesday that they were the latest carriers to have been exempted from an American ban on laptops and other electronic devices in the passenger cabins of flights from eight predominantly Muslim countries.
The restrictions were introduced in March after intelligence reports suggested that Islamic State militants were developing explosives that could be hidden in the batteries that power portable electronics, including laptops, iPads and other devices larger than cellphones.
The lifting of the laptop ban for some airlines coincided with President Trump’s efforts to bar all visitors from countries he views as a threat. In late June, the Supreme Court cleared the way for the Trump administration to enforce a limited travel ban for six predominantly Muslim countries while the court reviews the case. The United Arab Emirates and Turkey are not among the countries affected by the order.
The announcements from Emirates, which is based in Dubai, and Turkish Airlines, based in Istanbul, came after the Transportation Security Administration said on Sunday that Etihad Airlines had been approved after introducing more rigorous screening procedures at its base, Abu Dhabi International Airport.
A spokesman for the T.S.A. confirmed that Emirates had met the requirements for lifting the ban on its flights to the United States from Dubai International Airport, while Turkish Airlines received permission to lift it on flights from Ataturk Airport in Istanbul. He declined to discuss how the airlines had changed their security procedures at the airports.
The agency wants all carriers and airports with flights to the United States to increase the use of canine screening, install devices to detect trace amounts of explosives, and start interviewing passengers, if they are not doing so already.
“Effective immediately, the electronics ban has been lifted for Emirates’ flights from Dubai International Airport to the U.S.A.,” Emirates said in a statement, adding that it had been working with the local authorities to put in place new security guidelines for all flights to the United States.
Saudia, the national carrier of Saudi Arabia, said it expected the laptop ban to be lifted on its flights by July 19, Reuters reported, citing the state news agency SPA.
The original ban on devices applied to direct flights to the United States from 10 cities in eight countries: Amman, Jordan; Cairo; Istanbul; Jidda and Riyadh in Saudi Arabia; Kuwait City; Casablanca, Morocco; Doha, Qatar; and Dubai and Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates.
An official for Qatar Airways who has been briefed on the matter, but who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss it publicly, said the United States was trying to compel all affected airports to comply with new security procedures.
The T.S.A. told the airports last Thursday that they had 21 days, the official said, to put in place explosive trace detection screening for all United States-bound passengers and their bags — whether in the main cabin or in the hold.
That type of screening is already carried out at some airports, like Hamad International in Doha, on a random basis, but the Qatar Airways official said the United States was demanding the stricter approach at all airports on the list because of concerns about terrorism.
Qatar has sought to have the ban lifted on its flights to the United States from the affected airports. The spokesman for the T.S.A. said on Wednesday afternoon that this effort was still pending.
Ugur Cebeci, a Turkish aviation expert, said that Ataturk Airport in Istanbul had upgraded security measures to meet the demands of the United States — only the latest generation of devices can detect plastic explosives, he said — and acknowledged that American concerns were legitimate.
Still, he said, many in Turkey are skeptical about the circumstances surrounding the restrictions. “American companies find it difficult to compete in this region with Turkish Airlines and numerous Gulf airlines,” he said. “The Trump administration has been pressured by American companies for leverage in competition, so the real purpose of the ban is open to debate.”
In late May, the United States said it was considering a ban on electronic devices larger than cellphones in passenger cabins on direct flights to the United States from more foreign airports. But a month later, the Homeland Security Department said passengers would be subject to stricter screening of luggage and electronic devices.
In recent years, extremist groups have staged attacks on transportation hubs, including at an airport in Brussels and in Istanbul, and militants bombed a Russian airliner in Egypt in October 2015.
