Bomb Defused in St. Petersburg as 8 Held in Connection With Metro Attack
ST. PETERSBURG, Russia — The Russian security services disarmed an explosive device and detained eight people on Thursday in connection with a suicide attack on a metro train that killed 13 people on Monday.
The investigative committee, which is leading an inquiry into the bombing, said in a statement that six men were detained in St. Petersburg and two in Moscow. It said the explosive device, found in an apartment in St. Petersburg, was identical to the one the suicide bomber, Akbarzhon A. Dzhalilov, planted at the Vosstaniya Square station before he blew himself up between the Sennaya Square and the Technology Institute stations. The bomb at the Vosstaniya Square station was disarmed by a security officer before it could detonate.
Despite the arrests, it remains unclear whether Mr. Dzhalilov acted alone or as part of a wider network of militants.
The news added to an already tense atmosphere in St. Petersburg, the second-biggest city in Russia, which until Monday had been spared from any large-scale terrorist attacks.
Investigators discovered tinfoil, double-sided tape and other components of explosive devices in an apartment Mr. Dzhalilov rented in northeastern St. Petersburg, but there has been little to explain what turned a 22-year-old Russian with Uzbek roots into a suicide bomber.
Mr. Dzhalilov had lived in St. Petersburg since 2011, after obtaining Russian citizenship through his father. Previously, he lived in the city of Osh, in southern Kyrgyzstan, a region that has been the site of interethnic clashes between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz.
Many militants who have traveled to Syria to fight for the Islamic State or other militant groups have come from Osh, and an investigator told Kommersant, a Russian business daily, that Mr. Dzhalilov could have fallen under the influence of one of the terrorist organizations in Syria that has recruited Uzbeks.
Mr. Dzhalilov went to Kyrgyzstan in February, and from there tried to travel to Syria via Turkey, the newspaper reported. The investigators found burned sugar among the bomb components, a sign that Mr. Dzhalilov may have been trained by the Islamic State in Syria, Fontanka.ru reported.
After moving to St. Petersburg, Mr. Dzhalilov worked in a sushi bar, and at a car-repair shop with his father, Fontanka.ru reported. Mr. Dzhalilov’s movements over the past two years, however, are something of a mystery. He stopped using his social media accounts, where links to Islamist websites were among the few traces of his radicalization.
On Wednesday night, several dozen young people came to Marsovo Field, a vast square in central St. Petersburg that offers views of several famous city monuments. After a moment of silence, they assembled candles that together read “14:40,” the time the bomb exploded on Monday as a train traveled between two stations in the heart of the city.
“Such horrible acts have never happened in St. Petersburg, so for me it was a great shock, and I immediately came up with the idea,” said Pyotr Dorosheev, 26, the organizer. “We wanted to show that nothing can break St. Petersburg.”
On Thursday, pro-Kremlin organizations organized a series of antiterrorism rallies in major cities across Russia in what critics said was an effort to divert attention from the large anticorruption protests that swept across Russia at the end of March.
In Moscow, the rally was held at the central Manezhnaya Square next to the Kremlin, which is usually kept clear by the police of any public activity. Speaking from the stage, prominent Russian politicians, artists and public figures stressed the importance of unity against a common threat.
The Kremlin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, has denied any Kremlin role in organizing the rallies.
