Hamas Hangs 3 Men in Gaza Accused of Aiding Israel
JERUSALEM — The Hamas militant movement on Thursday hanged three men it accused of collaborating with the Israeli authorities, during a broader crackdown in the Gaza Strip after the assassination of one of the group’s top military leaders.
The three executed men were not said to be involved in the killing of the Hamas commander, Mazen Fuqaha, who was shot four times at close range in his car late last month. But Hamas has blamed Israel, and the executions were viewed as a warning against cooperating with Israelis.
Since Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in 2007, it has executed 25 people through its judicial system.
The group also praised but did not take responsibility for the death on Thursday of an Israeli soldier, Sgt. Elchay Teharlev, 20, who was rammed by a car while waiting at a bus stop near the Israeli settlement of Ofra in the occupied West Bank. A second soldier was wounded in the attack. The soldiers were standing near concrete barriers erected after previous vehicle attacks.
The attacker was identified as Malik Hamad, 22, from the nearby village of Silwad. The Palestinian news agency Wafa said he had been shot and wounded before he was arrested.
Nearly 40 Israelis — numbers vary — have been killed in a wave of attacks by Palestinians, mostly vehicle rammings and stabbings, since 2015. Though attacks happen frequently — there were two in Jerusalem’s Old City in recent days, resulting in the death of a Palestinian man accused of being an assailant — Thursday’s death was the first of an Israeli in an attack since January.
Over the same time period since 2015, Palestinian officials report that more than 250 Palestinians were killed in violence — most, according to Israel, while carrying out attacks or attempting to.
In Gaza, the killing of Mr. Fuqaha led to a tightening of internal security, and it set off a search for Palestinians who might be collaborating with Israel. Hamas gave the ages of the executed men as 55, 42 and 32, and said all of them had been jailed for several years on charges of spying and conspiracy.
Though the three men were not connected to Mr. Fuqaha’s death, Hamas appeared to connect the decision to carry out the executions to that death. In comments on the execution, Ahmed Bahar, first deputy of the Palestinian Legislative Council in Gaza, told a Hamas newspaper that Mr. Fuqaha’s death showed how collaboration was a “breach to internal security and stability.”
