Something to Wine About  Valentine's Day treats in a bottle 
   Here's hoping you have nothing to whine about on Valentine's Day. Whether you are celebrating togetherness with your sweetie, or celebrating your single status at an anti-Valentine's Day soiree, nothing adds to the fun like great wine. Here are a few of my favorite choices: 
   Let's start by popping open the bubbly. First up is two of my "Pretty in Pink" favorites. 
   Mumm Napa Brut Rose at under $20 is the perfect start to Valentine's day festivities whether you're in a LTR or just starting out. This sparkler is from California and packed with flavor. 
   Want to ante up a little bit more for your sweetheart or treat yourself? Close to the $40 mark is Domaine Carneros by Taittinger Brut Rose. This wonderful dry, flavor packed sparkling rosé is also from California. 
   It goes down super-easy and is quite crowd pleasing for parties. It also has a stunning package if you're shopping for a gift. 
   Moving on to still wines, a lovely Pinot Noir to celebrate with is Landmark Vineyards Overlook Pinot Noir 2015. 
   At $20 this California wine is a gorgeous balance of earth and fruit. It is light bodied with a beautiful garnet color and adequate legs. Notes of earth, tobacco and leather tantalize the nose. Notes of wild strawberries, star anise and dark chocolate are enchanting on the palate. A superb wine for chocolate pairing. 
   Love Block Pinot Noir 2014 from New Zealand is right around $25, very light bodied, but rich in earthy flavor. And the label is perfect for Valentine's Day. 
   Prefer white? Love Block 2014 Pinot Gris, at about $20, has a similarly on-point label for the holiday and is off-dry with notes of peach and lemon. It has good body and a pleasant round mouth feel. 
   Another white worth trying is Domaine Bott-Geyl 2014 Les Éléments Riesling. At just under $20, this is an elegant, light Alsace Riesling. It's dry with a luscious mouth feel and lovely finish. Full of ripe fresh pear and orange notes. I love this wine and want to try their Gewürztraminer. 
   There is a sweetness scale on these wines, rating them from dry at 1 to sweet at 9. This wine falls just short of 3, so it is dry. But sweet wine lovers sampling it were easily persuaded by this round and flavorful wine. 
   An intriguing French white is Domaine Felines Jourdan Picpoul de Pinet 2015. This wine is made from the Piquepoul grape, one of the oldest Languedoc grapes. 
   Notes of lemon and honeysuckle, delight in this light and fresh wine. It has good fruit, balanced acidity and nice clean minerality on the finish. It's packaged in a Mosel bottle, like most Rieslings, but it's much cleaner and lighter in body while still full of fruit flavor. 
   Want something a bit richer and darker? Try Maxville Cabernet 2014. This deep purple, California wine is resplendent with chocolate and dark fruit. Oak notes are expertly balanced with vanilla. 
   It'a long, satisfying and silky, and is the perfect complement for high-end dark chocolate. It is also my current favorite Cabernet in the $50 range. 
   Linda Delmonico Prussen is a Long Island-based award-winning journalist passionate about all things wine. 
   For more DAILY VIEWS, The News' contributor network, click here.    
