‘Enough With That Desolate, Overheated Outback stuff.’
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on Australia, news of the world and reader feedback in this weekly newsletter. Want it by email? Sign up.
______
“From my perspective the film ‘Crocodile Dundee’ never reflected what Australia was like — then or now.”
That’s Merydith Willoughby, one of the many Australia Letter readers who answered my call last week for insight on Croc Dundee and what a new and improved version might look like.
You know, one that wasn’t as Merydith put it: “high fetched and intended to intrigue the globe in order to get people to visit Down Under.”
I laughed and smiled and sharpened my kitchen knives reading the entries that came in. They revealed, as usual, a deep vein of inquiry around what it means to be Australian and how to make that clear to the world.
Below are a few of my favorites pitches — both serious and playful — followed by our weekly roundup and a recommendation for a photo festival we’re working with that’s eager for quality entries.
Share the word. Share your Australia Diary anecdotes. And, of course, share (and sign-up for) this newsletter.
Feedback? Find us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com and in our NYT Australia Facebook group.
___
Tassie Time
— Sheila Allison
An Aussie Battler
— Mark Thomas
‘Croc Dundee,’ Feminists First
— Kirby Franklin Warnock
______
The autonomous “selfie drone” that will follow you and film you is finally here.
As someone who both loves technology but hates seeing and hearing drones hovering over some of Australia’s most beautiful coastal walks, I’m not sure how to feel about this.
Neither is our tech columnist, Farhad Manjoo.
______
Are you watching the Olympics? Our complete coverage can be found on our 2018 Olympics page.
But if you only read one story, or if you’re just looking for something playful and less than purely jingoistic or celebratory, don’t miss this feature on one athlete’s ridiculous and revolting shoes.
______
The Israeli police recommended on Tuesday that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu be charged with bribery, fraud and breach of trust, in a scandal that has ties to Australia’s own James Packer.
According to the police, expensive cigars, jewelry and pink champagne flowed into the prime minister’s official Jerusalem residence in quantities sufficient to stock a small cocktail lounge — and Mr. Packer was one of the patrons.
Read our colleagues’ take from Jerusalem.
______
• An Affair Puts Spotlight on Australia’s Crony Culture: Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce is fighting for his political life, and Canberra’s cozy, clubby ways are looking increasingly inappropriate. (International)
• Is Australia’s Media Too Prudish for a Sex Scandal? Australia’s married deputy prime minister is having a child with a former staff member. The country’s media have been strangely reluctant to cover it. (Opinion)
• Who Is Harry Harris, Trump’s Pick for Ambassador to Australia? Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., the commander of the United States Pacific Command, is a vocal critic of China’s military expansion in the region. (International)
• Even Australia’s Medical Marijuana Poster Boy Can’t Get the Drug: Though legal in Australia, medical marijuana is difficult to obtain. One teenager, Lindsay Carter, has become the face of the issue. (International)
• Missing a Blue-Tongued Friend: A reader discovers her husband had a loyal companion while tending to his garden. (Australia Diary)
• Their First Adventures Began on a Slow Bus: Two very different travelers find their way to love, with sojourns in Australia, the United States and Latin America. (Weddings)
• At New Zealand Trail Huts, Shelter, Conversation and Community: Sometimes there’s solitude. Other times, lively discussions with new friends. And at every stop in the hut system there’s the Intentions Book. It’s must-reading. (Travel)
______
Break out your cameras, folks, and enter the Head On Photo Awards — Australia’s largest photo competition. It’s your chance to win $60,000 in cash, prizes and space for exhibition in Sydney at this year’s festival in May.
There are special categories for potraits, landscapes (like the winner above), mobile and for students too — and the great thing about it is that names and CVs are stripped off the entries. It’s just the images that will make or break you so forget the networking, and start shooting!
One of The New York Times’s most talented photo editors, Mikko Takkunen, will be among the judges.
Entries close Feb. 25.
