Racist Rant on Ryanair Flight Prompts Investigation by British Police
The British police say they are investigating a white man who berated a black woman with racist comments on a Ryanair plane last week, adding that they plan to turn over their findings to the Spanish authorities.
The police in Essex, a county in southeast England, said on Tuesday that they had identified both passengers in the “racially aggravated incident,” which occurred on Friday while the airplane was still on the tarmac in Barcelona.
A video of the tirade, in which the British man called the woman a “stupid, ugly cow” and an “ugly black bastard,” was recorded by a fellow passenger and has been viewed millions of times since it was posted online.
Flight attendants forced the woman, not the man, to move, and Ryanair’s handling of the episode was intensely criticized, with people urging a boycott of the Dublin-based budget airline and British lawmakers calling for action.
Because Ryanair is an Irish company and the incident happened on the ground in Spain, the man most likely could not be prosecuted in Britain, said Karl Turner, a British lawmaker who speaks for the Labour Party on transportation.
In Spain, the state agency responsible for air safety said that it could penalize the passenger if its investigation into his behavior concluded that it was that of a “conflictive passenger.”
The Essex Police said on Facebook on Tuesday, “Since the report was made to us, our officers have identified both parties involved and are progressing a number of enquiries,” adding that they learned of the video on Sunday.
“There are agreed national protocols to follow when incidents are reported to have happened in another country,” the police said. “As such, we will be conducting an investigation to submit to the Spanish authorities in due course.”
A spokeswoman for the police, reached by telephone on Wednesday, said that the inquiry was continuing and that no arrests had been made. The spokeswoman, who said she was not authorized to be quoted by name, declined to confirm the name of the man, whom the BBC and other British news outlets have identified.
The man started ranting at the woman, Delsie Gayle, while he was in the aisle, after he tried to get past her to sit by the window. Ms. Gayle, who has arthritis, apparently did not get up as quickly as he wanted, so he started to point his finger in her face, and she told him to stop, she said in an interview with ITV News on Monday.
The video by the fellow passenger, David Lawrence, captures the moments when the man, seated near a window, berated and bullied the woman, ordering her to move. In addition to the insults, he told her not to speak to him in a “foreign language,” though Ms. Gayle, who was born in Jamaica, was speaking English.
“I feel very low,” she said in the interview. “He paid a fare to go on holiday, I’ve paid mine, so why does he abuse me for that due to the color of my skin?”
Once the flight attendants moved the woman, the plane eventually took off from Barcelona, and the man apparently did not face any immediate consequences.
Mayor Ada Colau of Barcelona said on Facebook on Tuesday that the city would take legal action.
“Above all, we want to express our solidarity with the victim and our repudiation, not just of the racist, shameless, rude man that perpetrated this act of violence and hate, but also of the company for making the woman move seats, rather than the person guilty of the verbal attack, who deserved to be removed from the plane and taken straight to a police station,” she said.
“As a city we’re going to take this seriously, initiate legal action and present the video as proof,” Ms. Colau said. “Not just so that this racist, hate-filled man is punished, but also to force the company to change its procedures in such cases and support victims rather than aggressors.”
The airline said it had turned over the video to the police in Essex, who are in charge of the region around London Stansted Airport, where the flight landed. But the company, which has faced calls for a boycott, has not commented further.
On Wednesday, a reporter for The Daily Mirror published a video on Twitter of the police entering Chinn Brook House, a retirement home in Birmingham where the man is believed to live. Calls to the center on Wednesday were not answered.
An official at Optivo, the British housing provider for the man at the home, did not immediately return a request for comment. News reports said the man had refused to speak to reporters outside the center.
