Britain’s Parliamentary Chaos  Can It Happen in Canada?
If Boris Johnson has achieved nothing else during his brief time as Britain’s prime minister, it is this: Canada is no longer one of the only places in the world where nearly everyone knows what “prorogue” means.
Mr. Johnson taught the word to the masses when he announced last month that he would soon prorogue, or suspend, Parliament. He did it in an effort to cut short the time that British lawmakers would have in the next few weeks to debate his Brexit plans, and the result has been chaos. With Parliament still in session through the middle of September, British lawmakers have found ample opportunity to engage in hardball tactics that have provoked a constitutional crisis.
Canadians have long known what proroguing is because it is allowed by our system of government and has occurred here too. The practice effectively allows our prime minister to shut down the country’s legislature for up to a year and wipe out all legislation that is in the works.
This week as I was traveling Ontario to report about the nation’s coming election, my conversations repeatedly turned toward whether Britain’s parliamentary turmoil could happen here too.
[Read: Britain’s Conservatives Erupt Into Civil War as Unlikely Rebels Defy Boris Johnson]
I had called two Canadian scholars to see if it is constitutionally possible for a future Canadian Parliament to find itself in similar turmoil.
While Canada’s system is modeled on Britain’s, of course, there is an important distinction. Canada’s constitution is written while Britain’s is not, leading to the current joke that its unwritten constitution isn’t worth the paper it isn’t written on.
David E. Smith is one of Canada’s leading experts on parliamentary procedure and a professor at Ryerson University in Toronto and a professor emeritus of the University of Saskatchewan. He cautioned that many of the rules that govern Parliament specifically exist only in the sometimes fuzzy world of precedent and tradition.
[Read: Britain’s Unwritten Constitution Suddenly Looks Fragile]
Stephen Harper was the most recent Canadian prime minister to prorogue Parliament for political reasons.
Mr. Harper first used the tactic in 2008 to avoid a no-confidence vote that his minority government appeared certain to lose. He resorted to the technique again a year later, ostensibly to free lawmakers to attend the Winter Olympics in Vancouver. His opponents, however, charged that Mr. Harper was trying to quash parliamentary investigations of Canada’s treatment of Afghan detainees.
Both episodes provoked protests and calls for reform, although none were on the scale of those on Britain’s streets.
Both countries’ recent use of prorogation as a tool of political convenience doesn’t mean that the measure should be eliminated, said Adam Dodek, the dean of law at the University of Ottawa. It remains, in his view, an important tool for governments to clean up legislative clutter midway through their terms by killing bills that stand little change of passing.
He does, however, want Canada’s Constitution to shorten the period during which Parliament can be suspended.
[Read: Parliament’s Next Brexit Brawl: When to Hold Elections]
Some of Mr. Johnson’s critics have hailed Parliament’s block of his call for a new election as an effort to prevent his abuse of power. But both professors said Canada’s Parliament — which doesn’t have that power — should never get it.
“To me, an election is the ultimately form of accountability,” Professor Dodek said in arguing that lawmakers should not be able to block any election. “In Canada it would be a solution in search of a problem.”
Professor Smith said the Brexit brawl also vindicated his longstanding view that Canada should not use referendums to decide major political questions. Britain’s situation is entirely a result of a 2016 referendum that narrowly approved the country’s exit from Europe.
“We now have a key instance of why you shouldn’t make public policy with them,” Professor Smith said.
—Amid an ultimately flawed attempt to keep its contents secret, Margaret Atwood’s sequel to “The Handmaid’s Tale” is about to be officially released. Michiko Kakutani, our critic, found that “The Testaments” offers “a fast, immersive narrative that is as propulsive as it is melodramatic.” And speaking with Alexandra Alter of The Times, Ms. Atwood said that “I went back in my notes recently and found out that I was thinking about a ‘Handmaid’s Tale’ sequel back in 1991.”
—Bianca Andreescu, the 19-year-old tennis sensation from Mississauga, will play her first Grand Slam final, against Serena Williams on Saturday at the United States Open. I don’t dare make any predictions, particularly about a match that may have finished before any of you read this. But Christopher Clarey, our tennis expert who spoke with me for the previous Canada Letter, wrote this week that “her remarkable run and remarkable rise this season are 100 percent real.”
—Electric scooters that can be rented by the minute are trickling into several Canadian cities. In San Diego, where it’s estimated that there may be 40,000 of them, they are widely regarded as a menace.
—The grotty Gare du Nord railway station is one of Paris’s least attractive tourist stops. (Some disclosure: My view is colored by having been mugged there three years ago.) But plans to spruce it up and, perhaps inevitably, also turn it into a shopping center are meeting intense opposition.
