Dutch Officials Decline to Enforce New Partial Ban on Burqas
The Netherlands put in place a new law that bans burqas, niqabs and other face coverings in some public places on Thursday, despite uncertainty over what authority — if any — was willing to enforce the measure, which has been criticized as Islamophobic.
The law prohibits wearing coverings such as face veils, ski masks and full helmets in schools, government offices and hospitals with the penalty of a 150 euro fine, or about $166. The rule does not apply to people wearing face coverings in the street.
When the Netherlands passed the law last year, it joined several other European nations that have similar measures, including France, Germany and Denmark. In North America, Quebec has barred people wearing face coverings from receiving public services or working in government jobs.
Like those measures, the Dutch law has been criticized by rights groups, which say it discriminates against Muslim women and impinges on their freedom of religion.
The Dutch government has denied any anti-Islam basis for the law, saying it was enacted to ensure good communication and security in some locations. But experts say the law was the product of a swing toward nationalism among Dutch lawmakers, some pushed by the far-right lawmaker Geert Wilders and his party. Anti-Muslim figures, including Mr. Wilders, praised the new law, and Mr. Wilders wrote on Twitter that “today is a historic day.”
He said that the “next step” was a ban on head scarves, and wrote, “If you want to wear a burqa, then go live in Saudi Arabia or Iran.”
Prominent Dutch officials have said they will not enforce the law, or at least will not prioritize it. Mayor Femke Halsema of Amsterdam was one of the first to speak out against the measure, telling the television station AT5 last fall that her government did not intend to enforce it.
“It doesn’t fit Amsterdam to take women out of the tram for wearing a niqab,” Ms. Halsema said at the time. While a national law technically needs to be followed, she noted, officials can “decide which part of the enforcement you prioritize and which part you don’t.”
The national police later issued guidelines saying that employees in government offices, schools, hospitals and public transportation would be expected to ask people to remove face coverings or leave the premises. They also said that people would have to take off the garments to enter police stations.
But transportation and health officials said they would not prioritize the law, either.
Pedro Peters, the chairman of the Dutch Public Transport Association, told the Dutch news site NU.nl that just as the police would not see someone wearing a burqa or niqab as a top priority, transportation officials consider the movement of buses and trains to be their primary mission.
“You’re not going to shut down the bus for half an hour for someone who’s wearing a burqa,” he said. “We aren’t allowed to refuse anyone, because we have a transport obligation.”
Similarly, the Dutch Federation of University Medical Centers said that it would defer any enforcement to the police, according to The Associated Press. “We are not aware of any cases in which wearing face-covering clothing or a possible ban has led to problems,” its statement said.
In the confusion about who would enforce the law, the newspaper Algemeen Dagblad published an article this week suggesting that any Dutch person could make a citizen’s arrest. The police guidelines confirmed that a citizen’s arrest was possible, but urged people to be cautious.
“That was of course a very welcome signal to some of the right-wing politicians in this country who have sponsored this legislation,” said Tom Zwart, a professor of government at the University of Utrecht. “And for some people on social media, that’s an open invitation to start making life difficult for Muslim women.”
Of the Netherlands’ 17 million people, only about 150 to 400 women wear burqas and niqabs, according to Annelies Moors, a professor of sociology at the University of Amsterdam who studied the potential effect of the ban before it passed. She said that about 5 percent of the adult population was Muslim.
“The law provides a solution for a nonexistent problem, but may in turn cause problems,” she said.
The professor of government, Mr. Zwart, said that for women who wear burqas and niqabs, “it’s not symbolic at all, especially when a newspaper says citizens can make arrests,” he said. “Their safety is at stake.”
Mr. Zwart said he hoped that international scrutiny will lead to repeal of the law. He noted that a United Nations committee had ruled last year that France violated the rights of two women wearing niqabs, and that a recent report by the Council of Europe had criticized the Netherlands for “waves of online hate speech” and “a considerable number of hate-motivated attacks.”
Dutch mainstream politics and news reporting are “strongly influenced by a xenophobic, fear-fueling rhetoric and politicians have openly expressed racist beliefs,” the report said. It noted that Muslim groups have highlighted the burqa and niqab ban as a measure they feel targets them.
The Dutch interior minister, Kajsa Ollongren, said this year that the government would evaluate the new law in three years.
