Israeli Leader Claims Iran Has ‘Secret Atomic Warehouse’
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel told the United Nations on Thursday that his intelligence agents had discovered a “secret atomic warehouse” in downtown Tehran, escalating a growing confrontation with Iran and setting up a direct challenge to its government to open the facility to inspectors and prove it is not in violation of the 2015 nuclear deal.
Mr. Netanyahu’s claim, made at the same podium at the General Assembly where in past years he argued vociferously against signing the nuclear accord with Iran, came with photographs and map coordinates of the facility. He described it as a warehouse only three miles from the one that Israeli agents broke into last January, making off with 50,000 pages of documents and computer discs full of atomic weapons, warhead designs and production plans.
“Today, I am disclosing for the first time that Iran has another secret facility in Tehran,” Mr. Netanyahu said. “A secret atomic warehouse for storing massive amounts of equipment and material from Iran’s secret nuclear weapons program.”
Mr. Netanyahu did not describe what kind “equipment and material” was contained in the warehouse. Some types of equipment, especially if it was dismantled or could be put to a variety of industrial uses, may be permissible under the terms of the accord.
Iran’s Foreign Ministry spokesman called the remarks “false, meaningless and unnecessary,” according to a Reuters translation of a Fars news agency report.
Nonetheless, Mr. Netanyahu’s assertion poses a delicate political challenge for the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, whose inspectors frequently visit Iran’s declared nuclear facilities. The agency must now decide whether to demand access to the facility, based on the Israeli intelligence.
If it does not do so, perhaps declaring that the evidence is too vague, it may strengthen Mr. Netanyahu’s argument that the inspections have been far too lax, and focused only on known facilities. On the other hand, if the inspectors demand access to the warehouse, Iran may well resist, claiming that they are tools of Israel, Iran’s chief adversary.
During the speech Mr. Netanyahu held up a map showing what he said was the site of the facility, in the neighborhood of Turquzabad.
“Let me show you exactly what the secret atomic warehouse looks like,” he said, before showing a Google street view of a building. “Another innocent-looking compound.”
He also included the latitude and longitude of the building and challenged those watching at home to look it up on Google Earth.
“How about inspections, right here, right now,” he said as he pointed to a photo of the warehouse.
Israel officials were disappointed when Mr. Netanyahu’s disclosure in April of the atomic archive Israeli agents seized did not create the kind of headlines, or international outrage, they expected. That was in large part because the material was relatively old, most of it dating back 15 years or more.
In July, his government invited three reporters, including one from The New York Times, to examine key documents from the trove. They largely confirmed what was already known: that before 2003 Iranian scientists appeared to be working on nuclear weapons, in a program code-named Project Amad. That was halted, and some of the work, on a much smaller scale, was moved under cover to other locations.
The Israeli officials, during those meetings in Israel at which they released selected pages from the trove, never spoke of a second site.
Iran maintains that the archive is a fraud, invented by the Israelis. Mr. Netanyahu argues it is evidence of a nuclear-program-in-waiting.
On Thursday, he said, “The reason Iran didn’t destroy its atomic archive and its atomic warehouse is because it hasn’t abandoned its desire to create nuclear weapons.” Then he issued a threat, intended to play on Iranian fears that their program is ridden with spies.
“I have a message for the tyrants of Tehran,’’ he said. “Israel knows what you’re doing.”
“What Iran hides, Israel will find,” Mr. Netanyahu said.
Mr. Netanyahu pressed President Trump to exit the Iranian nuclear deal, which he did four months ago. The prime minister’s position differed from that of many of his intelligence chiefs. They argued that the Iranians appeared to be complying with the deal’s restrictions, at least for the time being, buying Israel some time before it has to confront the threat anew.
The Israeli prime minister spent much of his speech in front of the General Assembly denouncing those who support the Iranian nuclear deal and providing what he called evidence that Tehran is still pursuing a nuclear weapons program despite the agreement.
“When I spoke here three years ago, Israel stood alone among the nations of the nearly 200 countries that sit in this hall,” he said. “Only Israel openly opposed the nuclear deal with Iran. We opposed it because it threatens our future, even our very survival.”
