Embattled Macron Shuffles French Cabinet, Again, in Favor of Loyalists
PARIS — President Emmanuel Macron of France chose a party loyalist Tuesday to head the country’s police and counterterrorism operations, underscoring a focus on personal allegiance among his aides in a government some analysts have called the most top-down in modern French history.
The appointment of Christophe Castaner, who once declared “an aspect of love” in his relationship with Mr. Macron, to lead the Interior Ministry came on a day of government reshuffling in lesser posts. Mr. Macron took on eight new government ministers and got rid of four others, none big names in French politics.
But nothing had fueled as much intense speculation in Parliament and political circles as how the French president would fill the gaping vacancy at the Interior Ministry left by the resignation of his most senior aide, Gérard Collomb, who quit two weeks ago.
Would the new minister, whose offices are just down the street from the president’s in the heart of Paris, breathe fresh life into a government undermined by a sharp drop in public approval? Or would Mr. Macron close ranks and circle the wagons?
In the end it was the latter. Mr. Castaner was one of the president’s earliest supporters and has performed a variety of tasks for him. He was campaign spokesman, head of Mr. Macron’s political movement, La République en Marche — Republic on the Move — and indefatigable television talking head.
“Emmanuel is fascinating,” Mr. Castaner said in an interview in a magazine, Le Point, last fall. “Everything about him: his ascent, his intelligence, his vivacity, even his physical strength.”
The new government’s first day was stormy. On Tuesday, the police carried out searches at the homes and offices of officials of the main opposition party on Mr. Macron’s left, La France Insoumise, or France Unbowed. They were looking for documents relating to a possible phony hiring scheme using public money, as well as campaign finance violations.
The fiery leader of France Unbowed, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, filmed the search at his home on his phone and later angrily denounced an “enormous political police operation,” roaring to supporters in the kind of polemical harangue that has earned him a devoted, if still limited, following. “Here, there is supposed to be freedom in this country!” Mr. Mélenchon shouted.
In Parliament, Mr. Macron’s prime minister, Edouard Philippe, defended the government and underlined “the independence of the justice system” in the face of Mr. Mélenchon’s attacks.
But if France’s judiciary is independent, Mr. Macron’s cabinet is personally beholden to him — a reality reinforced by the selection of Mr. Castaner. In his first cabinet picks, only three of Mr. Macron’s ministers had independent political followings of their own. All three are now gone, two of them grumbling to various degrees about the impossibility of shining in Mr. Macron’s orbit.
“We’re faced with a system of power that is concentrated, controlled, locked up, to a degree that is unprecedented in the Fifth Republic,” the political philosopher Marcel Gauchet said in Le Débat, a centrist magazine, this month.
Mr. Macron has been criticized for governing too far to the right as he pushed through a series of economic measures seen as favoring employers and the wealthy. In picking the former Socialist Mr. Castaner to watch over France’s police, he tilted the balance slightly back to the left, in the view of analysts.
“What strikes me is that he preferred to name a Socialist at Interior, rather than someone from the right,” said the political scientist Gérard Grunberg.
“He needed to re-equilibrate to the left,” Mr. Grunberg said. “He had to do it. He couldn’t allow himself not to do it.”
But in choosing a follower of unquestioned devotion, the French president brushed aside the claims of independent heavyweights on the job. One high-profile name in circulation was the Paris prosecutor François Molins, the country’s most visible face in the fight against terrorism. Mr. Macron bypassed Mr. Molins, a careful jurist who dominates media coverage in France after each terror attack, in favor of Mr. Castaner, whom Le Monde described in a recent profile as “the president’s guard-dog,” and “the government Swiss Army knife.”
Critics in Parliament immediately noted that Mr. Castaner has little experience in two of the top challenges facing France today — migration and terrorism — both under the interior minister’s purview.
“I’ve never heard him, in five years, address the fundamental questions,” Eric Ciotti, a member of Parliament from France’s mainstream right, told Agence-France Presse on Tuesday.
Highlighting the lack of experience, Mr. Macron on Tuesday promoted France’s current internal intelligence boss and the former police prefect in Marseille, Laurent Nuñez, to be the second-in-command at the Interior Ministry.
Laurent Bigorgne, head of the Institut Montaigne, a think tank close to Mr. Macron, applauded the president for reinforcing the ministry dealing with local governments, a trouble spot, as France’s mayors are known to be unhappy with him. Mr. Bigorgne also dismissed the idea of choosing Mr. Molins, saying the police — which are under the Interior Ministry — would not have accepted a “magistrate” giving them orders.
Meanwhile, outside his party headquarters in the raffish neighborhood of the Gare du Nord in Paris, an enraged Mr. Mélenchon, the France Unbowed chief, got right down Tuesday to blasting Mr. Castaner.
“So this is how the new interior minister gets going, and the minister of justice, this is what they are doing in this country, to intimidate, and to frighten,” Mr. Mélenchon, wearing the patriotic red white and blue official sash, shouted to supporters who had massed in the street.
Police and judicial officials have been investigating both Mr. Mélenchon’s campaign finance accounts — some $510,000 worth of expenditures have been reported as questionable — and his use of parliamentary assistants for apparent political purposes at the European Parliament. That is the same offense of which Marine Le Pen, leader of the far-right Rassemblement National — formerly the National Front — stands accused.
To the police guarding the entrance to his party headquarters, Mr. Mélenchon, filmed by a journalist from Libération, shouted: “I am the Republic! I am the one who is the member of Parliament! Are you police in a republic, or a gang of thugs? Do you know who I am? Break down the door, comrades!”
