The Skywhale Returns to Australia’s Skies, and Its Creator Braces for Impact
[Sign up for the Australia Letter to get news with international context and cultural recommendations in your inbox each week.]
SYDNEY, Australia — With a head like a turtle, a body like a giant cetacean and ten bulbous, hanging breasts, one thing is certain: It is hard to ignore the Skywhale. 
When the hot-air balloon debuted in May 2013, looming over Canberra for the Australian capital’s centenary celebrations, critics said the “floating sculpture” created by Patricia Piccinini did not represent the city. Some blushed at the scale of its udders and at its six-figure cost.
Well get ready, Australia. It’s back. 
On Nov. 22, weather permitting, the Skywhale will float over the picturesque Yarra Valley in Victoria. The area is famous for ballooning, and the flight will coincide with the opening of the exhibition “Patricia Piccinini and Joy Hester: Through Love ...” at the TarraWarra Museum of Art.
Ms. Piccinini, an Australian artist known worldwide for her hyperreal hybrid silicone sculptures, said that she is looking forward to the Skywhale’s return. A test flight took place two weeks ago. 
“It’s thrilling to just have her in the air because she’s such a beautiful presence,” Ms. Piccinini said of the Skywhale. 
Australia’s initial rejection of the balloon sculpture has come to be seen by many as a telling example of the country’s discomfort with the avant-garde, or even just the unconventional. 
What many Australians found cringe worthy, though, much of the world has since embraced. 
Since its Canberra debut, the Skywhale has appeared in Japan, Ireland and Brazil. 
Its popularity has helped raise Ms. Piccinini’s profile: The Art Newspaper named her the top contemporary artist for visitor numbers worldwide in 2016 after the success of a solo show at the Centro Cultural Banco do Brasil.
The artwork itself has also gained a global following. Songs have been written about it, cakes made in its shape, and several people have contacted Ms. Piccinini to tell her they have tattooed the creature onto their bodies.
But here in Australia, the Skywhale — now owned by Global Ballooning Australia, with Ms. Piccinini holding the intellectual property rights — is mostly known for being controversial. 
Canberra’s political establishment in particular seemed flabbergasted when it first appeared. 
Jeremy Hanson, then the Australian Capital Territory’s opposition leader, called it an “embarrassing indulgence.” Katy Gallagher, who was the territory’s chief minister at the time, admitted that on seeing the designs, her eyes “nearly fell out” of her head. 
One Sydney Morning Herald columnist snidely questioned whether art and hot air could ever go together. Other critics took aim at its cost, as high as 350,000 Australian dollars, or about $330,000 at the time, according to one government document.
Much of the mockery has focused on the Skywhale’s enormous, hanging udders. Ms. Piccinini, whose work takes a bracing look at motherhood, reproduction and fertility, still smarts at the recollection of public derision.
“To me, it’s a very strong, maternal figure and in some ways I valorize maternal figures in my work, and the strength and beauty that they embody,” she said.
“People didn’t see that; they see a more sexualized thing,” she added. “Ten breasts are confronting. But at the same time, breasts are created to nurture the young.”
Ms. Piccinini admitted she found the vitriol directed at her sculpture painful. Last year, she said that raising money to fly the artwork again in Australia would be “almost impossible.” 
“Politically, no one will touch it,” she said at the time.
As such, November’s outing is “a pretty bold decision,” said Kiff Saunders, director of Global Ballooning Australia.
Yarra Ranges Tourism is the sponsor, paying several thousand dollars for the cost of the one-off flight, which includes a second balloon that will fly alongside and give a select group of Skywhale watchers a view from the air.
The exhibition “Patricia Piccinini and Joy Hester: Through Love …” will present works by Ms. Piccinini and the Australian modernist Joy Hester, one of Ms. Piccinini’s major influences,  who died in 1960.
Organizers hope the hard-to-miss artwork will promote an area known more for its natural beauty than for its cultural offerings.
“Having the Skywhale in the region for us is a coup,” said Brook Powell, marketing manager for Yarra Ranges Tourism. “Some people have quite violent reactions to it, other people adore it. I’d rather they hated it and loved it then didn’t notice it.”
Victoria Lynn, director of the TarraWarra Museum of Art, doubts there will be much of a backlash this time.
The initial outrage was because the Skywhale represented “a political moment,” she said, “whereas now she’s just a free-floating personality.”
Ms. Piccinini’s work “in general engenders strong emotions and I think it’s because she’s dealing with difficult topics,” Ms. Lynn added.
“Celebration of the female form and of fecundity and reproduction is something that is age old in the history of art; it’s just that Patricia has a contemporary expression on it,” Ms. Lynn said. “Art is there to challenge us, and Skywhale certainly does.”
Flying the balloon is its own challenge.
Built by specialists in Bristol, England, the Skywhale is taller than a seven-story building. The registered aircraft takes a team of five to operate, and windy conditions can lead to surprising issues.
“When you’re going down the pendulous breasts fly up like wings,” Mr. Saunders said. “It’s really got a life to itself.”
A large inspiration for Ms. Piccinini is Mary Shelley’s novel “Frankenstein,” which is observing its 200-year anniversary.
Ms. Lynn, from the TarraWarra Museum, insisted that the main lesson from the book — to learn to love the monsters we create — is apt. 
The Skywhale, she said, presents us all with a vital question: “Why can’t we just love the imperfect?”
Want more Australia coverage and discussion? Sign up for the weekly Australia Letter, start your day with your local Morning Briefing and join us in our Facebook group.
