Cody Weddle, a U.S. Journalist, Is Arrested in Venezuela and Will Be Deported
CARACAS, Venezuela — An American freelance journalist with legal residence in Venezuela was arrested on Wednesday along with his Venezuelan assistant by the country’s military counterintelligence service, the latest episode in an expanding crackdown on press freedom amid the country’s long-running political crisis.
The authorities held the reporter, Cody Weddle, 28, for several hours at the headquarters of the Directorate General of Military Counterintelligence after searching his apartment, Mr. Weddle said in a voice message late Wednesday. He was then told he was going to be deported and was taken to the airport by armed men, he said.
Lawyers in Venezuela said that Mr. Weddle’s assistant, Carlos Camacho, was released from police custody earlier in the evening.
Mr. Weddle said around 6:40 a.m., four people from the military counterintelligence service arrived at his apartment with a search order. He said they put all of his electronics in a briefcase, and more people arrived in civilian clothes to sweep the apartment — possibly looking for “spying equipment,” Mr. Weddle said.
He was then taken to the agency’s headquarters, where he said he was masked and hooded for hours. The mask was taken off and Mr. Weddle was asked questions about his work as a journalist, he said. Mr. Weddle is a freelance reporter whose most frequent employer is the South Florida television network WPLG.
“They wanted to know about the work I did; who I worked with,” Mr. Weddle said. “They wanted to know what kind of military people I’ve spoke to; what type of opposition politicians I know; who were the opposition politicians I spoke to in the past few days.”
Mr. Weddle said the people present also recorded him on video answering questions about the political climate in Venezuela, which has been in the grip of a crisis since President Nicolás Maduro was sworn in for a second term in January after an election widely viewed as undemocratic.
He said the people present guided his answers on the video, trying to get him to say “that Juan Guaidó is not the president and that the situation is a result of the sanctions,” Mr. Weddle said. Mr. Guaidó is the opposition leader who also claims the presidency.
After a few hours, the people present appeared to grow worried about the attention his detainment was receiving, Mr. Weddle said. He was taken to the airport by men in bulletproof vests, he said, and was to fly to the United States on Thursday.
Kimberly Breier, the United States assistant secretary of state for Western Hemisphere affairs, said on Twitter earlier Wednesday that the State Department was aware of Mr. Weddle’s arrest and demanded his “immediate release, unharmed.”
Mr. Weddle and Mr. Camacho joined dozens of journalists, both local and foreign, who have been detained in recent weeks in Venezuela.
The arrests came a week after the Mexican-American journalist Jorge Ramos was detained at the presidential palace after a confrontational interview during which he asked Mr. Maduro about the erosion of democracy and human rights in Venezuela, a once wealthy country whose economy has unraveled under Mr. Maduro’s rule.
“There are increasingly brazen tactics being used, and that speaks to the continued disregard on the part of Maduro and other Venezuelan state agencies for press freedom and the safety of journalists,” said Natalie Southwick, the Central and South America program coordinator at the Committee to Protect Journalists. “There is a lack of respect for the rights of journalists and the work they are doing in the country.”
It has not been uncommon in recent years for foreign journalists to be arrested and deported for not having a visa that grants them permission to live and work in Venezuela, but that is not the case for Mr. Weddle. According to his most frequent freelance employer, the South Florida television network WPLG, he has permission to live and work in the country.
“It is our understanding that he is living and working in Venezuela legally and has been doing so for the past four years,” E. R. Bert Medina, the network’s president, said in a statement. “Cody has been dedicated and committed to telling the story in Venezuela to our viewers here in South Florida.”
In a brief message on Facebook, Mr. Weddle’s mother said her son had told her that he had a visa granting him residency in Venezuela for five years.
“I just want to know that my son is O.K.,” she wrote earlier Wednesday.
Mr. Weddle, who speaks fluent Spanish, moved to Caracas in 2014 to work for Telesur, a television network funded primarily by the Venezuelan government that also received funding from leftist Latin American governments including Cuba and Bolivia.
He left the network in 2017 and began freelancing for less ideologically motivated news media organizations, primarily WPLG, which emphasizes coverage of Venezuela and Cuba for the large exile communities from those countries that live in its coverage area in Florida. Like many freelancers, he often reported, shot and edited his own stories.
Mr. Camacho is an economist who works as a producer and assistant for Mr. Weddle, Espacio Público said in a statement.
