German Man Who Poisoned Colleagues’ Sandwiches Gets Life in Prison
BERLIN — Something was very wrong at the valve factory. A 23-year-old trainee at ARI-Armaturen, a middle-sized manufacturer in the German industrial town of Schloss Holte-Stukenbrock, fell into a persistent vegetative state. He was found to have ingested highly toxic mercury, but investigators could not work out where it had come from.
Another employee on the same shift went to doctors at least five times with mystery symptoms, and was eventually found to have severe kidney damage.
The truth emerged, according to media reports, only when a third employee, Klaus Radke, noticed a brownish substance in the ham-and-cheese sandwiches he brought from home. After it had happened several times, he went to the police, and — about 18 months after the young trainee fell into the coma — they asked the company to install a camera in its break room.
A 57-year-old machinist, identified under German privacy laws only as Klaus O., was poisoning his colleagues’ sandwiches. On Thursday, a court in the nearby city of Bielefeld sentenced him to life in prison.
And the verdicts against him, for aggravated attempted murder and nine other charges relating to the trainee and two colleagues with lasting kidney damage, did not mark the end of the investigation.
The district attorney in charge of the case, Veit Walter, said his office was examining 21 deaths in and around the company, previously considered unrelated, for “any indication of foul play that would justify an exhumation.”
Investigators arrested Klaus O. on May 16 last year, after video showed him strolling into the break room, opening a colleague’s backpack, and sprinkling powder onto his sandwiches.
The machinist was found to be carrying a bottle of highly toxic lead acetate pills. The police then raided his home, and discovered what was described in court as a basement laboratory.
During the trial a psychiatrist testified that the defendant was interested in watching the effects of poisons on his victims’ health. He used lead, cadmium and mercury, apparently mixing chemicals in his home lab.
Mr. Radke’s final suspect sandwich — which he took to the police, after photographing and throwing out earlier examples — was said in media reports to have contained nearly 71,000 micrograms of lead, a substantial but far from lethal dose.
The court heard that the defendant had been experimenting with poisons for years, and had ordered a new batch on the internet days before his arrest. Investigators also found extremely high levels of mercury on his property.
Throughout the trial, which began in November, the defendant did not speak, other than to identify himself to the judge, in keeping with German courtroom rules. But the court did hear testimony from the man’s estranged siblings who described a traumatic and impoverished upbringing.
During the trial, a psychiatrist had confirmed that the defendant was not only fully responsible for his actions, but that he might strike again, if given a chance.
Under German law, prisoners given life sentences are eligible for review, and potentially parole, after 15 years. The sentence in this case, however, included preventive security custody, an indication that the man is likely to stay in prison indefinitely.
Such measures are exceedingly rare in the German justice system and reflect how grave the court considers the crimes. Last year a pedophile convicted of horrendous and systemic abuse was given a similar security custody.
“It’s not legally binding yet, since his lawyers are planning to appeal, but once it is, it will be probably the most severe punishment you can get under German law,” said Phil Gabler, a spokesman for the court, of the sentence given to Klaus O.
At one point during the trial, the district attorney asked Mr. Radke why he never started locking the backpack in which he brought his sandwiches.
“Nobody believes that a colleague does something like that,” he replied. “Because everyone trusts in each other.”
