Afghan Insurgents Blast Their Way Into a Ministry
KABUL, Afghanistan — Two different teams of insurgents launched separate attacks in Afghanistan on Wednesday, killing a police chief and two of his officers in a rural province, and pinning down hundreds of government employees in a ministry building in the capital, officials said.
At the Interior Ministry in Kabul, a sprawling compound near the international airport, a suicide bomber detonated explosives at the gate around midday, and an unusually large group of assailants followed, shooting their way in.
Others climbed a tall building nearby, firing rockets into the compound, police officials said. The attack was later claimed by the Islamic State in a Twitter post.
Early reports said one police officer had been killed in the Kabul attack and five wounded, with the assailants, said to number 10, also dead after three hours of fighting, according to Saifurahman Ayar Lemar, the spokesman for the criminal investigation division of the Kabul Police. Some officials feared the death toll would climb much higher.
Najib Danish, a spokesman for the ministry, said officials had the situation under control. “We are at the scene now, there is nothing to worry,” he said. “I can confirm there might be fatalities, but we have no number now.”
An employee of the ministry, reached in his office during the fighting, said everyone was locked into offices or safe rooms.
“I heard two or three really big explosions and now firing is ongoing,” he said, asking not to be identified because he was not authorized to speak to the news media. . “We are really scared and don’t know what is going on outside.”
Reza Kateb, a ministry official, posted on Twitter from inside the compound during the fighting, “We are going to kill all the terrorists in a few hours.”
Mr. Danish, the ministry spokesman, said the assailants had been in vehicles that made it seem as if they were from the international coalition.
The Interior Ministry is in charge of the police and other law enforcement agencies. The facility that was attacked on Wednesday opened last year, partly replacing the old ministry in the center of Kabul. That facility was attacked in February by suicide bombers in ambulances who killed more than 100 people, many of them police officers.
In Logar Province, just to the south of Kabul, insurgents mounted an early morning attack on Wednesday against the First District Police Headquarters in the provincial seat of Pul-i-Alam, using a suicide car bomb followed by three gunmen, according to Afghan police officials.
Three officers were killed, including the district’s well-regarded police chief, Khan Agha, and four others were wounded, said Shahpoor Ahmadzai, the spokesman for the Logar police.
“It was 5 in the morning when the Taliban exploded a car bomb near the First District Police Headquarters and three suicide attackers entered the building,” Mr. Ahmadzai said. “The police easily, in 10 or 15 minutes, killed all three of them.”
Eight civilians were also wounded in the attack, Mr. Ahmadzai said.
A spokesman for the Taliban, Zabihullah Mujahid, quickly claimed in a Twitter message that his organization had carried out the Logar attack, but said nothing of the ministry attack claimed by the Islamic State. The Islamic State is much smaller in Afghanistan than the Taliban, but in recent months it has carried out numerous suicide attacks, especially in Kabul.
