Marine Le Pen Is Charged in Inquiry Into Misuse of E.U. Funds
PARIS — Marine Le Pen, the French far-right leader and former presidential candidate, was charged on Friday in connection with an investigation into whether her National Front party misused funds at the European Parliament.
The charges were confirmed by Rodolphe Bosselut, Ms. Le Pen’s lawyer, in an interview with the BFMTV news channel.
The National Front, led by Ms. Le Pen, is accused of putting staff members who did political work unrelated to the European Union on the European Parliament’s payroll by having them sign up as phony parliamentary aides.
Ms. Le Pen, who until recently was a European representative herself, was charged with breach of trust over accusations that she put her chief of staff and her bodyguard on the European Union payroll at various times between 2009 and 2016. She was also charged with complicity of breach of trust for her wider role as head of the party.
The investigation and the looming possibility of a trial for Ms. Le Pen come at a difficult time for the National Front, which was thrown into turmoil by her loss in the presidential race and its lackluster showing in the legislative elections that followed.
Ms. Le Pen has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing and characterized the inquiry as meddling in the party’s internal affairs because of its anti-European positions. Sixteen other National Front representatives in the European Parliament have been under investigation by the French authorities since 2015. They include Ms. Le Pen’s father, Jean-Marie Le Pen, and her companion, Louis Aliot.
“There is nothing illegal,” Florian Philippot, a vice president of the party and a close ally of Ms. Le Pen, told BFMTV. “One can perfectly be a parliamentary aide and a party activist at the same time.”
During the recent presidential and legislative campaigns, Ms. Le Pen refused to answer a summons for questioning issued by the judges investigating the case. She was defeated by Emmanuel Macron, an independent centrist, in the second round of the presidential elections in May, but managed to win a seat in the National Assembly, France’s lower house of Parliament, in June.
Mr. Bosselut told BFMTV that there was “no fictitious work” and added that on Monday he would file a motion to dismiss the charges and to suspend the investigation.
The charges filed against Ms. Le Pen, who is not accused of trying to enrich herself personally, are preliminary and only mean that the judges working on the case have suspicions that are strong enough to formally place her under investigation.
If the judges send Ms. Le Pen to trial at the end of their investigation, she could face up to three years in prison and a fine of up to 375,000 euros, or about $428,000, if convicted. But the judges could also drop the charges completely if they fail to uncover sufficient evidence.
Other French political parties, including a centrist one allied to Mr. Macron’s party, have been dogged by similar allegations.
Ms. Le Pen was elected to the European Parliament in 2004, 2009 and 2014, and left after last month’s legislative elections to sit in the National Assembly. Several far-right parties in the European Parliament, including the National Front, have been accused of using its funds and benefits to push their anti-European agenda.
