Ban on Face Veils at Indonesian University Lasted Just a Week
JAKARTA, Indonesia — When the head of a prominent Islamic university in Indonesia banned the face-concealing niqab headdress on campus this month, calling it out of step with the country’s true culture, it seemed a significant pushback against the conservative drift of Islam.
Perhaps more significant is that the ban lasted just a week.
A string of protests broke out, including by former members of an Islamic group banned by the Indonesian government last year for spreading a Saudi-influenced brand of extremism. And at the start of last week, the rector’s office at the university, the Sunan Kalijaga State Islamic University in the Central Java city of Yogyakarta, confirmed that the niqab ban had been rescinded. No reason was given.
The issue has again pitted conservative Islamic groups here, which insist it is a woman’s right to publicly wear the niqab — a full head covering with only eye slits, usually accompanied by a shoulder-to-toe gown — against advocates who are concerned that more extreme strains of Islam have become ascendant.
“It’s good that there’s a debate on the niqab,” said Julia Suryakusuma, a prominent Indonesian author and social commentator. “But it’s scary that the debate is happening at all, because usually the more progressive view buckles under to the conservatives.”
Indonesia is the world’s most populous Muslim-majority country. But it is not an Islamic state, and it has influential Christian, Hindu and Buddhist minorities. While many Muslim women among the country’s 260 million people wear hijabs — the traditional Islamic head scarf that hides the hair and neck — many others do not.
However, conservative Islamic groups in Indonesia have set out to change that. They regularly hold protests against Western issues and values, and have campaigned for years for Indonesia to become a state guided by Shariah law.
These groups have supported hundreds of religiously inspired local bylaws in the past decades, the majority of which single out women — enforcing dress and morality codes — while others target religious minorities and gay, lesbian and transgender people.
In the months leading up to his niqab ban, the university’s rector, Yudian Wahyudi, and members of its staff expressed alarm that more and more students were wearing the niqab in recent years. In announcing the ban, he threatened to expel students who did not honor it. Mr. Yudian did not respond to messages last week seeking comment. 
Siti Ruhaini Dzuhayatin, an analyst on Islam and a lecturer at the university, said she regretted that her rector had rescinded the ban. She said it was important to point out that the niqab is not an integral part of either Islam or Indonesian culture.
“It is part of Arab culture,” she said. “If a cleric somewhere says it’s O.K. to wear the niqab, it’s only part of a culture, not Islam. It’s not true that there is this kind of teaching on clothing in Islam.”
That said, far more Indonesian women, in particular younger ones, wear head scarves today than 10 or 15 years ago, though most mix it with casual clothing.
Ms. Siti called the niqab “a new phenomenon,” noting that even Indonesia’s most traditional Islamic schools have never required women and girls to fully veil their faces.
Last November, the national government in Jakarta intervened after a picture showing girls wearing niqabs at a private Islamic high school in Central Java Province went viral on social media, warning the school that it violated Indonesian education regulations.
The increased prominence of niqabs has not been limited to schools. Last year, a women’s group named the Niqab Squad was formed at a Jakarta mosque to fight what it calls prejudice against face veils, and it now has chapters across Java.
The group also promotes clothing, including head-to-toe burqas with polka-dot trim, as fashion statements, which doesn’t go over well with everyone.
“The Indonesian masses are like sheep; they follow everything new,” said Ms. Suryakusuma, the author. “The trouble is this trend also has serious social and political consequences that could erode the Indonesian republic.”
