Trudeau Doesn’t Separate Refugee Families, but He Does Send Them Away  the Canada Letter
This week’s news was dominated by President Trump’s “zero tolerance” policy on illegal immigration and how it led to the separation of more than 2,000 children from their parents. I’ve compiled some of the highlights of our extensive coverage below. I’ve also been thinking, as I imagine you have, about what issues the controversy raises for Canada.
To much of the world, Canada is seen as the good guy when it comes to asylum seekers. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau famously handed winter coats to the first of what would be 33,000 Syrian refugees who came to Canada starting in late 2015, saying, “You’re safe at home now.” And Ahmed Hussen, Mr. Trudeau’s immigration minister, came to Canada as a 16-year-old refugee from Somalia.
[Read the four-part “Refugees Welcome” series that my colleagues Jodi Kantor and Catrin Einhorn did on the Canadians who supported them.]
But many people in the immigration world say that at least one key part of Mr. Trudeau’s policy is indefensible in light of Mr. Trump’s southern border crackdown: how it limits the ability of asylum seekers to get in.
“Canada looks better with how it treats asylum seekers after they arrive,” Audrey Macklin, a chair in human rights law and a professor at the University of Toronto’s law school, told me this week. “But Canada is harsher and more effective at preventing asylum seekers from arriving.”
Canada’s location isolates it from countries where refugees are fleeing on foot or by boat, making such control easier.
Mr. Trudeau joined the chorus of those condemning the Trump administration for its detention of children in shelters near the border. But Canada has a similar practice, if on a much smaller scale and with the children generally alongside relatives. Last year, 151 children were held at Canada’s immigration centers, effectively medium-security prisons that have been criticized as unsuitable homes for minors. Of that total, 11 were not with an adult.
The Trudeau government has vowed to cut those numbers and improve the system.
But it won’t budge on what Professor Macklin and others call the bigger issue: the “safe third country” agreement with the United States.
The agreement, drawn up in border-security talks after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, essentially allows Canada to turn back any asylum seekers who show up at regular border crossings, since Canada has declared the United States to be a safe place for refugees. That has led some asylum seekers to try to cross into Canada from the United States “illegally,” to use the government’s term, or “irregularly” as Professor Macklin prefers, particularly in Quebec.
Professor Macklin and others have long rejected the idea that the United States is a safe place to seek asylum. The current border turmoil, she said, has only reinforced that view.
Mr. Trudeau said this week that he had no plans to end the agreement, without offering much in the way of a defense of it.
The agreement is now being challenged in court for a second time. It was struck down in 2008 by the Federal Court but that decision was overturned on appeal.
Professor Macklin, meanwhile, has a more provocative proposal for killing the agreement. “If Donald Trump understood what the first safe country agreement does,” she said — meaning that it pushes immigrants back to the United States — “he would have been the first to suspend it.”
Though Mr. Trump backtracked amid the outrage and said families would now be detained together, it remains unclear how and when, even whether, children and parents who were separated will be reunited. The all-star team of Michael D. Shear, Helene Cooper and Katie Benner has reported that amid widespread confusion, plans are underway to house immigrants at military bases: U.S. Prepares Housing Up to 20,000 Migrants on Military Bases.
Vanessa Friedman, the chief fashion critic for The New York Times, turned her eye to this week’s political Rorschach test, the inexpensive Zara jacket with a message (or not) that Melania Trump wore while visiting immigrant children detained in Texas. She took the view that the jacket’s faux graffiti reading “I really don’t care. Do U?” is indeed a message, White House claims to the contrary. But she added: “The question is: Who was the intended audience?”: Melania Trump, Agent of Coat Chaos.
And in Opinion, Sonia Nazario, the author of “Enrique’s Journey: The Story of a Boy’s Dangerous Odyssey to Reunite With His Mother,” argues that ending the separations won’t end the harm to children:  There’s a Better, Cheaper Way to Handle Immigration.
Now, a shameless sales pitch for an amazing deal. On July 14, The Times is organizing a bus trip from Toronto to the Stratford Festival. Hopping on board will be one of our theater critics, Jesse Green, and Scott Heller, the theater editor. At Stratford, travelers on The Times’s magical theater tour will attend stage versions of “The Rocky Horror Picture Show” and “Coriolanus,” Shakespeare’s tragedy about a Roman general whose battlefield successes fail to translate to the political arena.
But wait, there’s more! The package also includes a light lunch and a conversation between Jesse and Scott as well as cast members for the two shows. A regular 250 Canadian dollar value that we’re offering to subscribers of The Times for just 125 Canadian dollars. How can you say no? Read the details and sign up for your spot here.
(And for those of you who are irritated by our style for handling Canadian currency, I hear you.)
In his State of the Art column this week, Farhad Manjoo makes a compelling case that tech companies have conquered the United States’ largest cities. That doesn’t mean that they’ve become, as he put it, “dystopian technocapitalist hellscapes in which corporations operate every essential service and pull every civic string.” Or maybe it does. You can read Farhad’s thoughts here.
It’s a pertinent question for Canada. Several Canadian cities are falling all over themselves to turn Canada’s pioneering academic research into artificial intelligence into investments from global giants — generally with success. And as I’ve written, there’s both boosterism and anxiety in Toronto about a proposal by a corporate sibling of Google to transform a rundown harbor area into a city of tomorrow. A place where masses of cameras and sensors will turn everyone who works, lives and passes through it into a data point for study and analysis.
Plus Toronto is still on Amazon’s shortlist for its second headquarters.
Tech jobs are, more often than not, high-paying jobs that demand a high level of skills. But tech companies — Uber comes to mind — often scoff at local laws. And it’s not just Google that’s trying to reshape cities. Self-driving cars may be good for technology companies’ share prices but many urbanists warn about their potential to erode mass transit systems, to mention one example.
What do you think: Is there a danger of a growing imbalance between the powers of local governments and tech companies? Please let us know: nytcanda@nytimes.com.
—Mr. Trudeau has fired the starter’s pistol by announcing that legal, recreational marijuana will be coming to stores in most of Canada on Oct. 17. Dan Bilefsky and Catherine Porter looked at the wide array of potential problems posed by the sweeping change, including how to deal with a black market now brazenly operating in the open.
—For a more relaxing border experience, join Porter Fox for a paddle along the invisible line between Canada and Maine.
