Canada Today  An Isolated Lake and a Welcome Mat for Refugees
Many Canadians may dimly recall from their geography lessons that Great Bear Lake is large and somewhere up in the Northwest Territories. Fewer, however, know much more than that, and fewer still have made the trip to the lake, which straddles the Arctic Circle.
The town of Deline, the only community on the lake, has ambitions of becoming a tourist destination. Peter Kujawinski, a novelist and journalist who was once based in Canada as an American diplomat, visited the town, population 503, for the Travel section of The New York Times.
Both Deline and the lake, designated a Unesco Biosphere Reserve, are managed by the Sahtuto’ine people under an agreement granted by the federal government last year. Mr. Kujawinski’s evocative article goes well beyond the usual limits of travel writing. “I returned to Deline to learn more about the community’s relationship with the lake, to witness the interplay of culture, language, wilderness and isolation that makes this area so distinct,” he wrote. He found that “the lake, like the Mona Lisa, is magnificent.”
Streaming Watching, The Times’s guide to television and movies, has a new feature for readers in Canada. Each month, it will list its picks of the films and shows new to Netflix in Canada. February’s installment is here and it includes “The BFG,” the Steven Spielberg film based on the Roald Dahl book; “The Diving Bell and the Butterfly,” the biopic based on the life of Jean-Dominique Bauby, who could communicate after a stroke only by blinking his left eye; and David Cronenberg’s “A History of Violence.” If you’re a Netflix subscriber in Canada, please let us know what you think about Watching’s new feature.
Status In December, Craig Smith looked at the thorny issues surrounding the federal government’s program to determine who is officially recognized as an Indian in Atlantic Canada. This week, he had a follow-up. The government has moved to revoke the Indian status of thousands of people who had been recognized as founders of the Qalipu First Nation band. It rejected applications from 72,118 people looking to gain that status and the benefits that come with it. The decisions have only added to the chaos surrounding the process.
Unearthed When The Globe and Mail recently moved its newspaper offices in Toronto, it didn’t take its photo archive of about 750,000 images along. They have instead been culled, and the highlights are now with the Canadian Photography Institute of the National Gallery of Canada. Laurence Butet-Roch of The Times’ Lens blog, which covers visual journalism, spoke with curator Roger Hargreaves about the collection he helped assemble into an exhibition and a book, “The Canadians.” One thing Mr. Hargreaves observed from the photos is that “in Canada there isn’t that assertion of nationalism and national identity through a visual emblem.” The exhibition at the National Gallery ends Sunday. I finally went this week and recommend that anyone who has the opportunity to see it, do so. For me, it unearthed memories of events I’d long forgotten, and it also revealed a past I’d never known.
Praise for Canada For the Opinion section, The Times columnist Nicholas Kristof traveled to Ottawa and met with Ahmed Hussen, the immigration minister, as well as some refugees. Mr. Kristof’s conclusion: “Canada’s leaders nurtured multiculturalism into a sacred part of the country’s identity. As the rest of the world bangs the doors shut, Canadians celebrate their openness — and, polls show, now take more pride in multiculturalism than in hockey.”
And disappointment with it Also in Opinion, Scaachi Koul, a culture writer for BuzzFeed, declared Prime Minister Justin Trudeau “a colossal disappointment for liberals and conservatives alike, despite his Superman-style coiffure.” She said that rather than being a “kinder, gentler” version of Americans, Canadians were “just more passive-aggressive, too frightened to acknowledge how we fail our citizens day after day.”
Here are some articles from The Times over the past week, not necessarily related to Canada and perhaps overlooked, that I found interesting:
— Welcome to the New World tells the story of a Syrian refugee family in the United States in the form of a comic.
— The residents of Donnelly, Idaho, population 150, have banded together to buy its bankrupt and unfinished ski resort.
— By day, Emmanuel Dongo, who uses crutches or a wheelchair, is a beggar on the streets of Monrovia, Liberia. At night he becomes Lyrical D, a rap artist and rising star.
