Israel Suspends Plan for Egalitarian Prayer Area at Western Wall
JERUSALEM — Yielding to pressure from his ultra-Orthodox coalition partners, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel on Sunday backtracked on a decision to create a space at the Western Wall in Jerusalem where men and women can pray together and non-Orthodox rituals can be practiced.
The agreement for the new egalitarian prayer space, adopted 17 months ago by the government after years of negotiations with Jewish leaders, was supposed to restore harmony at the ancient site, the holiest place where Jews can pray. The suspension of the plan is likely to deepen the divide between Israel and a majority of Jews in North America who are affiliated with non-Orthodox streams of Judaism.
There was no immediate comment from Mr. Netanyahu, but the decision not to move ahead with the plan exposed a rift within his right-wing coalition.
“Today’s cancellation of the decision is a severe blow to the unity of the Jewish people, the Jewish communities and the fabric of the relationship between the state of Israel and the Jews in the Diaspora,” said Avigdor Lieberman, the defense minister and leader of the secular Yisrael Beiteinu party. He called on other cabinet ministers to “return to rationality” and prevent a schism.
The iconic wall in Jerusalem’s contested Old City, a potent symbol for Jews around the world and a place for quiet reflection, has become the focal point in recent years of a battle over rituals between the strictly Orthodox authorities who control most religious life in Israel and the more diverse and liberal communities here and abroad.
American Jewish leaders, who had long chafed at the strictly Orthodox control of the ancient site, with its segregated men’s and women’s sections, had hailed the cabinet decision of January 2016 as “historic.”
But the prospects of it being fulfilled did not look good from the start. The ultra-Orthodox parties opposed it from the outset, and the original cabinet resolution lacked details and sidestepped any formal recognition of non-Orthodox religious branches in Israel.
After months of stalling by the government, the Reform and Conservative movements, along with Women of the Wall, a Jewish feminist group, petitioned Israel’s Supreme Court to compel officials to act. In November, liberal rabbis carrying Torah scrolls led a protest at the wall, known in Hebrew as the Kotel.
Sunday was the deadline for the state to file a response to the petition regarding implementation of the agreement, and the government decided instead to freeze it.
Mr. Netanyahu instructed two representatives to try to come up with a new framework and said the construction work to upgrade an additional prayer space at the southern section of the wall would continue.
Rabbi Rick Jacobs, the president of the Union for Reform Judaism, based in New York, said that any attempt to “cobble together” some lesser agreement was “unacceptable.”
Speaking shortly after landing in Israel for a gathering of world Jewish leaders, he described the Western Wall decision as “insulting” and “shameful,” and said it “communicates so loudly and clearly that non-Orthodox Jews don’t matter.”
“We all care deeply about Israel and we all see this as a distressing and dark day,” Mr. Jacobs added.
Mr. Netanyahu’s decision was “a stunning surprise, because this was the prime minister’s own proposal,” said Rabbi Julie Schonfeld, the chief executive of the Rabbinical Assembly, which represents Conservative rabbis in the United States. “After five years of negotiations, we can finally say this deal is now dead.”
Natan Sharansky, the chairman of the quasi-governmental Jewish Agency for Israel who was instrumental in the negotiations for a deal, expressed his “deep disappointment” with the decision.
The Orthodox rabbi of the Western Wall, Shmuel Rabinowitz, had at first said he would not oppose the deal with the non-Orthodox leaders, then he turned against it. “Before the ancient stones of the Kotel there are no streams, sects and disputes, but one large community of individuals standing in prayer, together, in awe,” he said in a statement on Sunday. He pledged to uphold the tradition and custom of the place of the past 50 years, meaning Orthodox control.
Uri Ariel, the agriculture minister from the Jewish Home Party who supported canceling the 2016 decision, said, “It took time, but we have succeeded in persuading the government to cancel the deal, which damaged the Kotel and the Jewish status quo.”
