Truce in Part of Syria, Announced by Trump, Survives First Day
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Representatives of Syria’s warring parties gathered in Geneva on Monday for the seventh round of peace talks, as a limited truce, negotiated by their big-power backers, appeared to be holding for a full day in southwest Syria, according to local residents and human rights monitors.
The cease-fire, negotiated by the United States, Russia and Jordan, applies to a strategic area across southwest Syria, near its border with Jordan and the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights.
The choice of southwest Syria for a truce reflected the relative stability of the front lines in the area and the small number of extremist fighters among the rebels who could act as spoilers, according to an official involved in the negotiations. The official spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to brief the news media.
Southwest Syria also has been viewed with increased concern by both Israel and Jordan over what they describe as advances made by Iranian-backed militias fighting alongside the Syrian government, including Hezbollah. A successful cease-fire would stop such advances.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group, reported that despite small breaches, including bursts of gunfire at the front lines, the truce had largely held since it went into effect at noon on Sunday.
Similar truces have been brokered before between the United States and Russia, which back opposing sides on the battlefield. They have all eventually collapsed.
But this truce was the first to be announced by the Trump administration. President Trump seized on it as a measure of diplomatic victory during his first meeting with his Russian counterpart, President Vladimir V. Putin, on Friday at the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg.
Russia brokered a truce with Turkey, an important rebel sponsor, in northern Syria in December. That, local residents say, has tamped down violence there, notably the Syrian government’s aerial bombing campaign.
The Syrian battlefield is populated by a mix of rebel groups, supported by Jordan, Turkey, Persian Gulf countries and the United States. Backing the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria are soldiers and advisers from Russia, Iran and Hezbollah.
Syrian and Russian forces have justified their military attacks on many rebel groups as targeting terrorists; affiliates of Al Qaeda in Syria and the Islamic State have not been part of the truces.
On Monday, Syrian forces said they had attacked Islamic State fighters in one area covered by the truce, an assertion disputed by local rebels, some of whom have received covert aid from the United States and its allies. They said the area contained no Islamic State fighters.
The latest truce covers three important areas in Syria’s southwest: Dara’a, Quneitra and Sweida. The Syrian government had announced a unilateral truce in those areas last week, with the latest international agreement extending it.
Dara’a is where the rebellion against the Assad government began in 2011, and much of its countryside is held by rebel factions, armed and aided by the United States, Jordan and others. An extended halt in violence there would help Jordan make the case for the return of Syrian refugees from its territory.
The United Nations secretary general, António Guterres, welcomed the truce but said it should not be used to push refugees back into Syria until they are ready.
“Notwithstanding this positive development, the secretary general urges all countries to preserve the right for all Syrians to seek asylum and enjoy refugee protection until conditions are conducive for return in safety and dignity,” his office said in a statement on Monday.
Sweida is dominated by the Druse minority, which is largely loyal to the Assad government; Qaeda affiliates are scattered in the area along with nonextremist rebel factions who fight under the banner of the Free Syrian Army.
Quneitra is important to Israel because it presses against the Israeli-held portion of the Golan Heights, a strategic area Israel captured from Syria in their war in 1967. Syrian forces in Quneitra are backed by Hezbollah fighters, and on Sunday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, while welcoming the cease-fire, warned against “Iran and its proxies” establishing themselves in the area.
Iran, which was not part of the deal, called on Monday for the cease-fire to be expanded nationwide.
What impact — if any — the southwestern truce deal will have on the United Nations-brokered talks in Geneva is unclear. Representatives of the rebel factions have yet to negotiate face to face with their adversaries from the government.
They have convened in different rooms in what the United Nations special envoy in charge, Staffan de Mistura, has called “proximity” talks.
Asked about the southwestern Syrian truce, Mr. de Mistura suggested to reporters in Geneva on Monday that he was optimistic about it.
“In all agreements there is a period of adjustment. We are watching very carefully,” Mr. de Mistura said at a news conference. “But we can say we believe it has fairly good chances of working out.”
