   A New Zealand businessman previously fined for shipping a box of pigs’ heads to a mosque in Christchurch was sentenced Tuesday to nearly two years behind bars for sharing video recorded by a gunman as he opened fire inside the same Muslim house of worship in March. 
   Philip Arps pleaded guilty in April to two counts of distributing the gruesome clip, recorded from the perspective of the shooter and livestreamed on Facebook as he slaughtered 41 people gathered for weekly prayer at the Al Noor Mosque in Christchurch. The gunman later killed more people at the Linwood Islamic Centre. 
   In addition to sharing the gunman’s video online, prosecutors said the 44-year-old Arps also shared a doctored version — edited to look like a first-person shooter game, complete with crosshairs and body count — to another 30 people. 
   Under New Zealand laws aimed at preventing the distribution of the livestream, Arps had faced up to 14 years in prison on each count. Christchurch Judge Stephen O’Driscoll, who pointed to the suspect’s lack of empathy toward the mosque shooting victims, handed Arps 21 months behind bars. 
   He cited how the businessman described the massacres as “awesome” and how he previously compared himself to Ruldolf Hess, a Nazi leader under Adolf Hitler, in determining the sentence. 
   “Your offering glorifies and encourages the mass murder carried out under the pretext of religious and racial hatred,” O’Driscoll said. 
   Nearly three years before the shooting at Al Noor, Arps was convicted on a charge of offensive behavior for leaving pigs heads inside a box outside the house of worship, the New Zealand Herald reported. He was fined $519 for the incident, which he also filmed and posted online. 
   Australia native Brenton Tarrant last week pleaded not guilty to 51 counts of murder, 40 counts of attempted murder and one count of terrorism in connection with the pair of March Massacres. 
   Authorities said Tarrant, who left behind a manifesto packed with anti-Muslim and White Supremacist rhetoric, strapped a camera to his head and recorded a livestream for social media while he opened fire inside the Al Noor Mosque on March 15. 
   The 17-minute video remained on Facebook for nearly a half hour before it was flagged. It was eventually scrubbed from the site, but not before it was copied and shared across the internet. 
   From Al Noor, police said Tarrant drove a few miles to Linwood and opened fire inside a second mosque, where seven more worshipers were killed. Another two people later succumbed to their wounds at area hospitals. 
   A total of 51 victims were killed in the shooting, with dozens more injured. 
   Three days after the attacks, New Zealand censor, David Shanks, determined that possessing or sharing footage of the massacre was against the law. Shanks, who is primarily tasked with ruling what material is forbidden in the nation, also outlawed Tarrant’s manifesto. 
   Arps is one of at least five other people charged for illegally sharing the shooting video. An 18-year-old in March was jailed in for sharing the clip and an image of the Al Noor mosque captioned with the phrase “Target Acquired.” 
   The teen is slated to appear in court on July 31. 
   With News Wire Services   
