E.U. Sets Aside Calls to End Visa-Free Travel for Americans
The European Commission said on Tuesday that it would not start requiring Americans to obtain visas for travel to the European Union, at least for now.
Right now, United States citizens generally do not need visas to enter any of the union’s 28 member nations, but citizens of five of those nations — Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Poland and Romania — need visas to travel to the United States.
That disparity has been the subject of a diplomatic dispute between Washington and Brussels that threatened to escalate in March, when the European Parliament asked the commission, the bloc’s executive body, to retaliate by ending visa-free travel to Europe for Americans.
The Parliament’s resolution was nonbinding, and the commission said Tuesday that it would not comply with the request. Doing so “would be counterproductive at this moment, and would not serve the objective of achieving visa-free travel for all E.U. citizens,” it said.
The commission added, “On the contrary, it would immediately result in retaliatory measures by the U.S., leading to the visa requirement being imposed on all E.U. citizens.”
Dimitris Avramopoulos, the commissioner for migration, home affairs and citizenship, said that inflaming the dispute would not help because the union was making progress on visa issues through diplomacy. He noted that Canada had agreed to stop requiring Bulgarian and Romanian visitors to obtain visas as of Dec. 1.
“Our continued engagement and patient diplomatic contacts over the past year have brought tangible results already with Canada, and we are committed to proceeding in the same way with the U.S.,” Mr. Avramopoulos said in a statement. He added, “We are on the right track.”
The commission said it would report to the Parliament again on the matter by the end of the year.
European impatience with the American visa policy has been building for years. The commission considered proposals a year ago to end visa-free entry for Americans and Canadians, but it concluded then that doing so would “have significant negative impacts in a wide range of policy areas, notably on external relations, trade, tourism and the E.U.’s economy.”
The commission said on Tuesday that in recent months, “political and technical contacts have been stepped up” with the new American administration. Mr. Avramopoulos said he had discussed the matter with the Homeland Security secretary, John F. Kelly, in Washington on Feb. 8. The subject also came up when American and European officials met in Malta in March.
The United States’ Visa Waiver Program currently allows most citizens of 38 countries to visit for business or tourism for up to 90 days without obtaining visas.
Legislation signed by President Barack Obama in 2015 created an important exception: Travelers from countries in the program who have been to Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria or Yemen need visas to enter the United States.
