SYDNEY, Australia — The names of a handful of mountains and creeks in the state of Queensland containing racial slurs have been removed from the state’s official records, the latest such move in a country still reckoning with its colonial past.
The Queensland Department of Natural Resources and Mines said in a statement on Tuesday that, because of “community concern,” the name of a mountain containing a racial epithet was removed from its records in May.
The department, which administers the naming of places, then began a review of its database and found nine others that used “a similarly offensive term,” the statement said. Those nine names were removed from the record on Aug. 14.
Among them were seven creeks, another mountain and a small island.
The decision is the latest such call for name changes over the last decade, as community groups across Australia have voiced anger at names that they say are offensive either because they are overtly racist, or because of their portrayal of painful historical events that occurred there.
It also comes amid debate in other countries over whether and how to preserve legacies of slavery and colonialism. Last year, New Zealand changed three racially-offensive place names. In the United States, calls to remove Confederate flags and monuments have prompted violent, even deadly, clashes.
In May, the Tasmanian Aboriginal Center, a government-funded group that advocates on behalf of Aboriginal communities, announced that it was seeking to have 11 traditional place names, including Victory Hill, Suicide Bay and Cape Grim, stricken from the record. Those names, the group said, were offensive because they referred to massacres of Indigenous people.
In 2008, a ridge in Alpine National Park in the state of Victoria whose name included a racial slur was renamed Jaithmathangs, the name of a local language. But the new name ignited outrage among the Dhudhuroas, a local Aboriginal group, who said the new name was culturally and linguistically inappropriate, as it applied to a different group that lived miles away from the ridge.
The mayor of the Tablelands Regional Council in North Queensland, Joe Paronella, said that 14 years ago, a creek in the area with the same racial epithet was renamed Wondecla Creek.
“I’m certainly in favor of that happening, and to be perfectly honest, I’m surprised that it’s taken this long,” he said, referring to Tuesday’s announcement.
Suggestions for new place names can be submitted by local governments, community groups and private citizens to the Queensland Department of Natural Resources for consideration. Names accepted for consideration will be presented to the public for feedback before being approved by the state’s minister for natural resources, Dr. Anthony Lynham.
