What’s Going On in an Australian TV Ad Opposing Gay Marriage?
SYDNEY, Australia — The first television advertisement advocating a “no” vote in the coming postal survey on legalizing same-sex marriage in Australia aired Tuesday night, with the message that legalization would have damaging effects on children’s experience of gender and sexuality.
In the ad, released by the Coalition for Marriage, three women share their concerns about their children’s welfare over a tense piano soundtrack.
“School told my son he could wear a dress next year if he felt like it,” one woman says. Another adds, “Kids in Year 7 are being asked to role-play being in a same-sex relationship.” The text onscreen reads: “In countries with gay marriage, people have lost their right to choose.” The final message is “it’s O.K. to say no.”
What does this reveal about the “no” campaign’s arguments against same-sex marriage?
Basically, the ad shifts the debate from marriage itself to the possible consequences for children.
Lyle Shelton, managing director of the Australian Christian Lobby, which is part of the Coalition for Marriage, suggests that legalization would contribute to “gender fluidity” and allow the introduction of “radical homosexual education sexual education” programs in schools.
Those “are a package deal — you’ve only got to look at the people who march under the rainbow flag and banner,” Mr. Shelton said on the radio station 3AW on Wednesday. “I think it’s all part of the same rainbow-political movement. It’s a consequence of redefining marriage.”
Critics have called the ad a “red herring,” wondering why the debate on consensual adult marriage is being conflated with cross-dressing.
“The people behind this ad know that Australians believe everyone should have the same opportunity to marry, so they are deliberately resorting to misleading people,” said Tiernan Brady, the executive director of the Equality Campaign in Australia, which supports same-sex marriage.
It’s a “think of the children” argument: Three mothers share their fears that schools will promote behavior that they disapprove of. A program they might have in mind is a government-financed initiative run by Safe Schools Coalition Australia. Mr. Shelton and some other opponents of same-sex marriage have called it a “radical L.G.B.T.I. sex education program.”
What does the program involve? According to the website, it aims to “help schools to be safe and more inclusive for same-sex attracted, intersex and gender diverse students, staff and families.” The website provides tools to guide teachers on topics like running school dances and affirming 
