Among countries of the world, Australia and New Zealand are like siblings, with a shared colonial history and close trade, military and cultural ties. They even have a joint holiday to commemorate the sacrifices both nations made in World War I.
So it was something of a shock on Tuesday when Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop, accused New Zealand’s Labour Party of trying to “undermine the Australian government” by exposing the citizen status of Australia’s deputy prime minister.
Revelations surfaced a day earlier that the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, was a New Zealander by descent.
Four other Australian politicians have resigned or come under scrutiny in recent weeks because of questions about their citizenship. What started out as a minor political scandal now threatens the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull. The Australian Constitution does not allow people with dual citizenship to be legislators, and if Mr. Joyce is forced to step down, the government will lose its one-vote majority in Parliament.
His case will be decided by Australia’s High Court.
The citizenship contretemps began last month when the deputy co-leaders of the Australian Greens, Scott Ludlam and Larissa Waters, resigned from the Senate after they discovered that they were dual citizens. Ms. Waters, who in May became a trending topic around the world after she breast-fed her daughter in Parliament, turned out to have Canadian citizenship. Mr. Ludlam, like Mr. Joyce, has New Zealand citizenship.
Then Matthew Canavan stepped down from his ministerial post, though not his Senate seat, after learning his mother had registered him for Italian citizenship, and Senator Malcolm Roberts has been forced to offer evidence that he renounced his British citizenship after documents showed he had traveled on a British passport.
On Monday, Peter Dunne, a government minister in New Zealand, said in an interview that Mr. Joyce could claim citizenship in that country because his father had been born there.
On Tuesday, Ms. Bishop accused the Australian Labor Party of contacting the New Zealand Labour Party — both are left-leaning opposition parties — to suggest an inquiry into Mr. Joyce’s citizenship.
She specifically pointed a finger at Bill Shorten, the leader of Australia’s Labor Party, saying he used New Zealand’s Labour Party to “raise questions in a foreign parliament deliberately designed to undermine confidence in the Australian government.”
Mr. Dunne, the leader of New Zealand’s right-leaning United Future party, said claims that he was provoked to investigate were “utter nonsense.”
But a New Zealand Labour politician, Chris Hipkins, admitted that an Australian Labor Party member had suggested that he raise the questions in New Zealand’s Parliament.
New Zealand will hold a general election on Sept. 23, and Ms. Bishop said her government would find it hard to work with New Zealand’s Labour Party if it won. She said the left-leaning parties in both countries had put relations between Australia and New Zealand at risk.
“I would find it very difficult to build trust with members of a political party that had been used by the Australian Labor Party to seek to undermine the Australian government,” she said.
The new leader of the New Zealand Labour Party, Jacinda Ardern, called Ms. Bishop’s accusations untrue.
Ms. Ardern said she would “not let false claims stand in the way” of the relationship between her country and Australia. She met with Australia’s high commissioner, its highest envoy in New Zealand, on Tuesday to voice her disappointment with Ms. Bishop’s remarks and to say that the behavior of Mr. Hipkins was unacceptable.
Mr. Turnbull said Monday that Mr. Joyce’s case showed the need for the High Court to examine the application of the constitutional provision that bars dual citizens from taking office.
He added that “possibly millions” of Australians might not know they had dual citizenship with other countries.
