   Looking for something different than Pinot Grigio or your go-to Sauvignon Blanc as we reach summer's midway point? Here are some interesting choices from around the globe. 
   Let's start with something that's easy to grab and go — cans! 
   Seven Daughters Rosé and Moscato Vento 
   Yup. Seven Daughters has released a few of their wines in single serving cans. The cans are perfect for picnics, the boat or the beach. But how's the wine? 
   I won't, and you shouldn't, ever, sacrifice good taste for convenience — but the Moscato Vento is terrific. I'm not a sweet wine fan, so that's saying something. 
   While it is decidedly sweet, as Moscato is, it isn't overly sweet, or unctuous. It's light, with refreshing frizzante, and well balanced. Notes of honey and apricot up front and a nice lemony finish. 
   The rosé is fantastic. Fun, fresh and fruity and leaning a bit more toward sparkling than frizzante, I was not prepared for how much I'd enjoy this wine. A long dry satisfying finish keeps the notes of berry in this semi-dry wine from being too childish or sweet. 
   I've seen four packs of the Seven Daughters Rosé and Moscato Vento from between $14 to $18. Average price: about $4 a can. 
   Casa de Pacos 2016 Vinho Verde 
   This Portuguese white wine has a nose of candied strawberry. But this is not a sweet wine. This dry, fruity white is filled with notes of the freshest summer fruits, honey dew and lemon. The perfect summer sipper, this wine has layers of flavor and wonderful structure, but none of the aggressive acidity. At under $10, you can't go wrong. Really. You can't. 
   Notable Australia Chardonnay 2016 
   Peachy and fresh, this is a bright, beautiful stainless-steel Chardonnay. I often find stainless-steel chardonnays too acidic, especially on the finish, but this wine truly hits all the right notes. 
   You're greeted with a fruity and floral nose. And while the front label boasts citrus as the dominant tone, I found the peach flavor to be the standout in this symphony. Unlike your more sedate oaked chardonnays, this is a fun wine sure to be welcome at any summer celebration. 
   Secateurs Chenin Blanc 2016 
   I love Chenin Blanc. This South African one is delicious. Honey suckle, orange, peach and the lightest of lemon round out a lovely wine. At just under $15 and with a screw-top, it's a great summer wine to pack for a picnic on the beach. 
   Tramari 2016 
   This Italian delight opens with a fruity and floral nose, good citrus mid-palate and a soft lingering finish. Coming in at under $15 a bottle it is a fantastic summer buy. 
   Tablas Creek Vineyard 2016 Patelin de Tablas Rose 
   Another delightful, easy-drinking rosé is from Tablas Creek Vineyard. The 2016 Tablas Creek Rose can stand shoulder to shoulder with French Rhone blends. It's a yielding, yet structured, Grenache based wine. It has a soft and satisfying finish. And that is rare. 
   Outside, eating a summer fruit salad with watermelon, and pineapple? This is the wine to complement, not compete, with it. Cold seafood and sushi would also be a wonderful pairing. 
   Retailing around $25 a bottle, it's a nice buy for casually-upscale al fresco dinners. 
   White Pinot 2016 by Anthony Nappa 
   This lively wine reminds me of July 4th fireworks. It's bright, fresh, bursting with fruit and has a slight effervescence that while perhaps unintended, complements the spirit of the wine. 
   I feared the finish would be rife with acidity, but I was wrong. It has a nice long, tempered finish. At about $17 a bottle it's a fun wine to have on hand. 
   Chapel Down Three Graces 2010 
   This sparkling wine is from England. Skeptical? I was, too, but I was happily won over by this cheery and cheeky wine. It's dry, but oh so flavorful. It has a nice round mouth-feel and a pleasing finish. It is priced similar to many champagnes at around $50 a bottle. Skip the OJ. Drink it straight. 
   Invivo 2014 Pinot Noir 
   Hailing from New Zealand, this elegant Pinot Noir is a bit fuller bodied and sweeter than some other Pinots. Bright cherry, rich dark fruit, good structure. It's very drinkable with a nice easy finish. 
   At just about $35 it would not only make a lovely gift for the Pinot Noir fans in your life, but would be fun to have with s'mores at a late summer bonfire. 
   Ancient Peaks 2016 Sauvignon Blanc 
   Okay, I said I was writing about wines different than Sauvignon blanc, but this Sauvignon Blanc is so different it's special. 
   With notes of peach and honeysuckle, a round, soft mouth-feel, and a lovely lemon meringue finish, you can't help but want more. It'll challenge your perceptions of Sauvignon Blanc, especially if you're accustomed to the New Zealand varieties. 
   Retailing at just around $15 it's perfect for outside day events and hot summer nights. 
   Nobilo 2016 Sauvignon blanc 
   This Sauvignon blanc from New Zealand does have a screw top. But what it doesn't have is the overly aggressive grapefruit notes and acidic finish many New Zealand Sauvignon blancs have. 
   Still bright, fruity and crisp, this Sauvignon blanc retails for about ten bucks. Daytime drinking poolside? This wine is the easiest choice to make. 
   Linda Delmonico Prussen is a Long Island-based award-winning journalist passionate about all things wine.  
   For more DAILY VIEWS, The News' contributor network, click here. nydailynews.com/tags/daily-views   
