She Gambled on Her Claim to Link Russians and Trump. She Is Losing.
PATTAYA, Thailand — Caught in a Thai police raid on her group’s seduction seminar, a Belarusian escort grabbed the world’s attention in February when she claimed to have audio recordings that might show a link between Russian officials and the election of President Trump, betting that it could turn into a get out of jail free card.
Six months later, her gamble appears to have badly backfired.
What began as a minor immigration charge has turned into a serious criminal case carrying the potential of 10 years of prison time in Thailand. And in a new interview with The New York Times, the escort, Anastasia Vashukevich, became coy about the content of her recordings — and said she now has no plan to make them public.
Ms. Vashukevich, who goes by the name Nastya Rybka online, remains in a Thai prison along with the Belarusian man she calls her seduction coach, Alexander Kirillov, and six of their Russian associates.
This past week, a judge set their trial for mid-January, after they all pleaded not guilty to charges of indecency, conspiracy and belonging to a secret society — an escalation of charges that they claim they are facing because of the intervention of a foreign power they angered.
“They are afraid that I have something,” Ms. Vashukevich said in the interview.
The events in Thailand are part of a continuing drama involving a powerful Russian tycoon, a seduction plot, and questions about the Kremlin’s interference in the United States election.
Go here for a collection of Times reporting on the Russian campaign to disrupt the 2016 election.
Now, Ms. Vashukevich says she sent copies of her recordings to the tycoon, Oleg V. Deripaska, with whom she says she had an affair and whose private conversations she recorded.
Her hope is that he will rescue her from prison.
“Now I just want to wait for Oleg’s answer,” she said. “I just want to be friends.”
Mr. Deripaska has emerged as a pivotal figure in United States relations with Russia.
One of Russia’s wealthiest men, he is close to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, and had business ties to President Trump
