Canadian, French citizens killed in London attack; officer confronted terrorists ‘armed only with his baton’
   A hero cop was among the 48 injured in Saturday night's London terror attack, while officials identified a Canadian woman and a French national as two of the seven people killed. 
   The slain Canadian national was identified as Chrissy Archibald of Castlegar, British Columbia, who had worked at a homeless shelter before joining her fiancé in Europe. 
   "We grieve the loss of our beautiful, loving daughter and sister," her family said in a statement to Canada's CTV. 
   "She had room in her heart for everyone and believed strongly that every person was to be valued and respected," the statement continued. "She would have had no understanding of the callous cruelty that caused her death." 
   Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said earlier Sunday he was "heartbroken that a Canadian is among those killed." 
   "Canada strongly condemns the senseless attack that took place last night in London, United Kingdom, which killed and injured many innocent people," Trudeau said. 
   A French person was also among the dead, French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian said, according to Reuters. Seven French nationals were hospitalized — with four sustaining serious injuries — while another remained missing, Le Drian added. 
   A British Transport Police officer with less than two years on the force — and armed only with a baton — suffered serious injuries to his head, face and leg, police confirmed in a statement Sunday. The injuries were not considered life-threatening. 
   "Although he is seriously unwell, he was able to recount how he faced the attackers armed only with his baton, outside London Bridge station," Chief Constable Paul Crowther said. 
   An off-duty Metropolitan Police Service officer was also among those injured in the bloody truck-and-knife assault by London Bridge and a nearby market, according to the Guardian. 
   Sunday Express business editor Geoff Ho was stabbed in the throat after coming to a tavern bouncer's aid in the melee, the UK's Mirror reported. Ho later turned up at a hospital's ICU, where he was unable to speak. 
   "Don't know whether it was stupid or noble to jump in and break up the fight outside the Southwark Tavern, but two a---s trying to do over the lone bouncer on the door isn't happening on my watch," he wrote on Facebook, per the Mirror. 
   One Spaniard was wounded, a spokesman from Spain's Foreign Ministry said. 
   Meanwhile, Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull confirmed his authorities were "aware of reports of two Australians who have been directly affected by this attack." 
   One appeared to be Brisbane resident Candice Hedge, who was reportedly unable to talk after undergoing surgery for a stab wound to the neck. 
   The 34-year-old was working at a Borough Market restaurant and bar with her boyfriend, Luke, when the violence unfolded, the Sydney Morning Herald reported. 
   "I'm doing OK. Still in hospital, but all in the clear. I really can't talk," Hedge wrote on Facebook, according to the Herald. "The f----r stabbed me in the neck. Don't worry too much. I love you all." 
   Hedge's mom, Kim Del Toro, told the paper her daughter was "going to be fine, thank goodness." 
   Oliver Dowling, 32, of Christchurch, New Zealand, was recovering from stab wounds on his face, neck and stomach, his sister reportedly confirmed on Facebook. 
   "Doctors are very happy with how he's come out the other side," wrote Freddy Dowling, according to the New Zealand Herald. "A massive thank to the University of London Hospital for their tireless efforts in helping my brother out!!" 
   Oliver Dowling's girlfriend, Marie Bondeville, underwent surgery at a different hospital, according to the injured man's sister, though she was unable to provide any status updates. 
   A member of the public was also accidentally wounded by police gunfire, Metropolitan Police Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley told reporters on Sunday. 
   The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the mayhem Sunday after three suspects were shot dead by police. The assailants have not been identified. 
   Authorities on Sunday morning made a dozen arrests, including seven women and five men, in connection with the bloodshed in a Barking, east London raid, Metropolitan police said. 
   One male has since been released without charge, police said. 
   British Prime Minister Theresa May on Sunday said "enough is enough," calling for more stringent measures to combat Islamist extremism. 
   "While we have made significant progress in recent years, there is, to be frank, far too much tolerance of extremism in our country," she said. 
   With News Wire Services 
   With ELIZABETH ELIZALDE   
