Are Australia’s Politics Too Easy to Corrupt?
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
A few minutes before this year’s federal budget was announced in Canberra, I found myself completely lost in the labyrinth of Parliament, wandering in search of the press gallery. Somehow I ended up on a middle floor in a sea of the well-dressed and well-heeled.
These were political donors, I was told, lobbyists and generous patrons. They had paid for access, for a chance to sip bubbly with lawmakers in the halls of Australian government.
I was a bit surprised by the scene, but then I remembered something the novelist Richard Flanagan had told me: “Australia is a lot more like Asia than people realize. It’s got these very closeted but very accepted forms of corruption.”
This week, we heard a lot about one possible source of that corruption: Money from China. A joint investigation by Fairfax Media and Four Corners highlighted various tactics that China uses to exert its influence in Australia, including the use of Chinese college students to report dissenting Chinese classmates, and the use of money given to political parties and universities.
The report focused in part on two billionaire property developers who have given millions of dollars to Australian politicians: Chau Chak Wing, an Australian citizen, and Huang Xiangmo, a resident who has applied for citizenship.
Both men have denied that their generosity has anything to do with efforts to tilt Australian politics toward China.
The broader issue — which we wrote about this week — is that Australia is an easy target. This is one of the few democracies in the developed world that allows foreign donations, and its campaign finance system makes it easy for donors from anywhere, including Australia, to give and get access, and hide their donations from public sight.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said this week that he wants to put an end to some of this by banning donations from foreigners. The idea appears to have wide support even if it is a convenient bit of outrage for Mr. Turnbull given that more of money from Chinese donors is believed to go not to his party, but to Labor.
The real question, though, according to some of the legal scholars we talked to, is: When will Australia go beyond cutting off foreigners, and shaming China, to create a more transparent political culture that forces all parties to disclose a wider range of giving, quickly, and to explain how the money they receive is spent?
Further to the point, when democracies worldwide are facing toxic distrust and cynicism, when will elected leaders here and elsewhere do more to address public frustration with a political structure that looks rigged and wired up for those who have already acquired power and wealth?
Don’t hold your breath; as a reader in our NYT Australia Facebook group put it: “Full of rorts. Think pigs with their snouts in the trough.”
Now here are a few other items worth reading, some tied to Australia, some not — followed by a few recommendations from my trip to Melbourne.
As always, we welcome feedback at nytaustralia@nytimes.com, and if you like what we’re up to, tell your friends to sign up.
______
Tim Winton has written a “landscape memoir” that we have finally reviewed and our reviewer seemed to like even if Mr. Winton came off a bit, well, annoying. “Much as I admire Winton’s activism and eloquence,” she wrote, “there are passages in ‘Island Home’ that are dusted with the desert bravado of Edward Abbey, that at times are annoyingly alpha male.”
_____
Speaking of alpha males, this week we said goodbye to Jack O’Neill, the maverick who popularized and may have invented the wetsuit. I just got my first full-body bit of neoprene (yes, I’m learning to surf, and mostly failing) so I found this obituary for Mr. O’Neill quite touching. I especially liked this line: “When you get all screwed up, and you jump in the ocean,” he was quoted as saying, “everything’s all right again.” Amen, Jack. Amen.
______
As long as we’re on the topic of men and masculinity, our data-centric colleagues at The Upshot have provided what might be called an essay guide that explores what parents can do to make sure boys grow up into men who treat women fairly and don’t fall into the usual traps of gender. I’m partial to the advice about teaching them to do more housework, even if my son is not.
______
I’ve known Amy Harmon since we both covered technology in San Francisco ages ago, and I edited a long narrative of hers on race and middle-school math earlier this year. I love this feature from her because it’s about kids again, and classic Amy: deeply reported and overflowing with empathy. The students and the teacher, and rural American existence, all come to life.
______
I was in Melbourne this week and had a drink at Belleville, which is my first recommendation — what a great spot, big and friendly, the kind of place that lets people like Sam Wallman sit and draw for hours.
His Tumblr page is actually recommendation number two.
My final suggestion, drawn from a few more beers at Belleville with an old friend from San Francisco who now lives in Melbourne, is a 1999 documentary that captures the American working-class with humor and dignity.
It’s called “Hands on a Hardbody” and it’s about a contest in which the person who lasts longest just standing there with at least one hand on a truck (a ute) actually wins the truck. It sounds strange, but I looked up The Times review and I’m not the only one who liked it.
Here’s a key passage from the review:
See you next week, for more human drama. Or, if you’re a Times subscriber, join us in the NYT Australia Facebook group for a daily dose of Times-ian conversation.
