Juan Guaidó Returns to Venezuela, Facing Threat of Arrest
CARACAS, Venezuela — Juan Guaidó, the Venezuelan opposition leader, returned to the country on Monday and gave a speech before cheering crowds in defiance of President Nicolás Maduro, who had threatened to have him arrested if he came back.
“We shout with resolve, ‘may oppression die,’” said Mr. Guaidó before supporters gathered in Caracas, the capital. “They threatened us with jail, with death, but nothing will happen through persecution.”
For days, it had been unclear whether Mr. Guaidó would be able to return to Venezuela after he flouted a court-imposed order not to leave the country and made a failed attempt to move truckloads of aid into the country over Mr. Maduro’s objections.
When he arrived at the Simon Bolívar Airport near Caracas on Monday, after more than a week abroad, his supporters celebrated around him, hopeful he would breathe new life into the opposition’s movement to topple Mr. Maduro.
While Mr. Maduro has jailed his opponents freely in the past, he made no attempts on Monday to impede Mr. Guaidó, showing what analysts said were the limits to his ability to dispatch the opposition with a crackdown.
“We saw clearly that the government understands the danger in arresting Guaidó,” said Dimitris Pantoulas, a political analyst in Caracas. “This could generate tremendous violence in Venezuela. The government is now going to have to hope that his protests simply peter out.”
Mr. Guaidó, who had spent the last week on a tour of South America, returned with the renewed backing of regional allies, many of whom sent diplomats to meet him at the airport. As he departed for Venezuela on a flight from Panama, the Trump administration warned Mr. Maduro’s government to take no action against him.
“Any threats, violence, or intimidation against him will not be tolerated & will be met with swift response,” Vice President Mike Pence wrote on Twitter on Monday. “The world is watching — Interim President Guaidó must be allowed to re-enter Venezuela safely.”
Still, some warned Mr. Guaidó remains in danger in Venezuela.
“Of course, getting to Caracas accompanied by diplomatic officials doesn’t mean he won’t be arrested in the coming days,” said David Smilde, a senior analyst at the Washington Office on Latin America.
The United States is one of the more than 50 countries that recognize Mr. Guaidó as Venezuela’s rightful president until new elections can be held. Several countries sent diplomatic representatives to the airport to safeguard Mr. Guaidó’s arrival.
Mr. Guaidó, 35, has become the biggest challenge yet to Mr. Maduro’s embattled presidency since he declared himself interim president in January on grounds that Mr. Maduro won a second term through fraud.
The struggle between the two has intensified as Venezuela, once Latin America’s most prosperous nation, has slid into its worst economic crisis, with Mr. Maduro accused by critics of corruption and mismanagement. Food shortages are acute, the health care system has collapsed and more than three million Venezuelans have fled.
Mr. Maduro has called Mr. Guaidó a lackey of the Trump administration and attributed the country’s economic malaise to American sanctions, which have been intensified by President Trump.
Mr. Guaidó landed around noon local time and was mobbed by large crowds of well-wishers shouting his name and waving flags. The arrivals terminal echoed with chants of “libertad,” and “sí se puede,” or “freedom” and “yes we can” in Spanish.
The United States joined European and Latin American countries in sending diplomats to put pressure on the Venezuelan government not to arrest Mr. Guaidó.
“We have the hope that he has a safe return so he can continue with his role as president of the National Assembly,” said Daniel Kriener, the German ambassador to Venezuela, to journalists in the airport.
Mr. Guaidó had called for demonstrators to hold large rallies throughout the country, and scores of supporters gathered in a plaza to await his arrival.
“I hope they make the mistake of arresting them,” said Carmen Herrera, who was selling Venezuelan flags to demonstrators, saying it was unlikely the government would succeed if they detained him. “I am against Maduro.”
American officials have said they remain vigilant of Mr. Guaidó’s safety.
On Sunday, John R. Bolton, the White House national security adviser, said on Twitter that an arrest of Mr. Guaidó would be met with a response “from the United States and the international community.” On Monday, administration officials said they were also cracking down on Cuba by tightening the economic embargo against the island — a move viewed as symbolic, but aimed at Cuba’s support for Venezuela.
Over the weekend, Mr. Bolton appeared in several television shows and explained the administration’s approach to Venezuela. He emphasized building a coalition to replace Mr. Maduro over providing help to Venezuelan citizens displaced by the turmoil.
Despite ramping up forceful rhetoric, Trump administration officials have stayed away from the idea of military intervention in recent days, instead focusing on economic sanctions they hope will help weaken Mr. Maduro and his supporters.
On Friday, Elliott Abrams, the administration’s top envoy to Venezuela, announced new visa restrictions on “dozens” of people close to Mr. Maduro.
Mr. Guaidó left Venezuela surreptitiously on Feb. 23 to help direct an effort to bring truckloads of emergency aid into Venezuela via border crossings in Colombia and Brazil. The effort was blocked by Mr. Maduro’s armed forces and other loyalists, and left Mr. Guaidó afoul of the law in Venezuela, where he faced a travel ban.
The restriction had been imposed by the country’s Supreme Court last month after the Venezuelan attorney general asked for an investigation of “violent occurrences” that happened before Mr. Guaidó challenged Mr. Maduro’s legitimacy.
Last week, Juan Carlos Valdéz, an auxiliary judge on the Supreme Court, told Russia’s Sputnik news service that Mr. Guaidó could face a 30-year prison sentence for having left the country.
