Berlin Murder Raises Suspicions of Russian Involvement
BERLIN — The killing of a former Chechen separatist commander in central Berlin has raised concerns that Russia may have deployed an agent to a European nation to target a Kremlin opponent, a tactic it has been accused of using many times in the past.
The victim, Zelimkhan Khangoshvili, who fought against Russian troops in the second Chechen war 20 years ago, was on his way to Friday prayers last week when he was shot in the head twice by a bicycle-riding man using a handgun with a silencer, according to witness accounts cited in the German news media.
The Russian government in 2006 legalized the killings abroad of people who were judged to pose terrorist threats, resuming a Soviet-era practice.
The Kremlin has never acknowledged using the authority granted under the law and has denied specific accusations, including that it tried to kill a former double agent, Sergei V. Skripal, with a nerve agent in Britain last year. In Ukraine, the authorities have reported a number of killings and attempted killings that they attribute to Moscow.
In Germany, Mr. Khangoshvili had told close friends and the authorities that his name had been on an official wanted list in Moscow since 2002.
The German police arrested a 49-year-old Russian man, publicly identified as only Vadim S., and said he faces charges of “treacherous manslaughter.” Police divers recovered the suspected weapon, a Glock 26, and a bike in a nearby river, the Berlin state prosecutor’s office said on Twitter.
The midday killing had been well planned, early reports suggest. After approaching his victim from behind and shooting him at least twice, the killer biked his way a few hundred yards south to a riverbank. Two witnesses saw him throw his bike and a plastic bag into the Spree River.
The witnesses alerted the police, who found the suspect in nearby shrubs, where he had changed his clothes and appearance, and seemed ready to travel by scooter. He had a large amount of money with him, the police said.
The suspect’s identity is based on the name on his Russian passport, though the document had not been verified. The man had arrived from Moscow via Paris a few days earlier, according to news reports, and was scheduled to fly back to the Russian capital.
Mr. Khangoshvili had been a target before, according to an advocate familiar with his case. He had survived at least two attempts on his life in Georgia and had sought safety in Germany.
“He was in constant danger from the Russians,” said Ekkehard Maass, the director of the German-Caucasian Society, who had supported Mr. Khangoshvili’s asylum application in Germany. “His death fits into a long list of targeted killings by the Russians over the past decade.”
In Ukraine, the authorities have reported multiple assassinations and attempted assassinations using me
