German Elections Reveal, and Deepen, a New East-West Divide
FORST, Germany — On the eastern edge of former Communist Germany, Dr. Thomas Jähn sees his patients five days a week. Some come to talk about their own health, others about the health of German democracy.
About the local post office that just closed down. About the train line to Berlin that was promised but never built. About the coal production that is being phased out nearby and the thousands of jobs going with it.
And about the lingering inequality between East and West three decades after the Berlin Wall fell.
“They ask me, ‘What’s the point of voting when no one listens?’ ” Dr. Jähn said before two closely watched eastern state elections this Sunday.
Dr. Jähn, a family doctor in the small town of Forst, has been listening. Three months ago, he was elected to the town council for the far-right Alternative for Germany, alongside other respected figures in the community: a fireman, a plumber, a businessman and a soccer coach.
That, in a nutshell, says Mayor Simone Taubenek, an independent, helps explain why the far right is so strong here: “When the local doctor votes far right, it gives them legitimacy.”
The far right may be flatlining, even borderline imploding, in Western Germany, trailing far behind Chancellor Angela Merkel’s conservatives and garnering less than half the support of the resurgent liberal Greens.
But here, in the former Communist East, the Alternative for Germany, known by its German abbreviation AfD, is competing to be No. 1. A broad-based political force embedded at the grass-roots level, the party has become Exhibit A for a Germany that is more divided between East and West than at any point since reunification.
That is one reason Sunday’s state elections in Saxony and Brandenburg, coming 30 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, have taken on an outsized symbolic importance.
“It’s a moment to take stock of reunification — and of the strength of the far right,” said Marcus Böick, a historian specialized in recent East German history.
The two things have become inextricably linked, he said.
The AfD has both tapped into the East-West division and exacerbated it by actively styling itself as an Eastern identity party. “The East Rises Up!” reads one of its campaign posters. “Complete the revolution,” another urges, a reference to the 1989 protests that brought down Communism and ushered in democracy and capitalism.
“East German identity is part of the AfD’s identity,” said Norbert Kleinwächter, a national lawmaker for the AfD, who was campaigning in Forst one recent evening. “There are Westerners and Easterners — their experiences are very different.”
Such messaging plays well at a time when voters in the former East have started telling pollsters that they identify as “East German,” something few did even under Communism. Over 70 percent of West Germans simply feel “German,” a recent survey by the Allensbach institute showed. In the East, that was true of only 44 percent.
In Brandenburg and Saxony, the two states that vote this weekend, polls give the AfD up to 25 percent support. On Sunday, when voters elect a new regional legislature, the party could come first in one or both regions.
In Forst, a once prosperous textile hub on the Polish border that lost thousands of jobs and half its population after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the AfD is already No. 1.
One in three voters among the 18,500 inhabitants support the far right. The party has the biggest group in the town council.
Ask Ulrich Mäbert, a local businessman, why he votes for the AfD after years of casting his ballot for Ms. Merkel’s conservatives, her social democratic coalition partner and, once, for the Greens, and he points to acres of undeveloped land on the town’s edge.
“This is our industrial area,” he said bitterly, his arm sweeping across the empty fields. The investment and jobs successive politicians promised never materialized, he said.
In downtown Forst, shuttered factories and smoke stacks still dot the sky line. Trees grow out of abandoned villas. A graffitied slogan sums up the mood: “Nobody can help.”
Mr. Mäbert remembers the euphoria 30 years ago, when Ms. Merkel’s one-time mentor and predecessor, Helmut Kohl, promised Easterners an economic miracle in a unified Germany.
