   Police in California arrested a man with known gang affiliations for the murder of an officer gunned down during an early-morning traffic stop, bringing to a close an intense three-day manhunt for the suspect. 
   Gustavo Perez Arriaga, 33, was taken into custody without incident in Kern County early Friday morning for the shooting death of Cpl. Ronil Singh, the first-ever officer with the 12-person Newman Police Department to be killed in the line of duty. Officers with the Kern County Sheriff’s Office were serving a warrant at a residence in Bakersfield when they found the suspect, who entered the country illegally. 
   Authorities said Arriaga intended to flee to Mexico, but was instead placed in Singh’s handcuffs and escorted to the Stanislaus County Sheriff’s Office. 
   Police on Thursday also arrested five other people connected to Arriaga — including his 25-year-old brother, Adrian Virgen, and a co-worker, 27-year-old Erik Razo, who allegedly provided officers with false and misleading information in a bid to protect the wanted man. Stanislaus County Sheriff Adam Christianson said both of the men were also in the country illegally. 
   Singh’s younger brother, Reggie Singh, burst into tears as he thanked officers for the successful capture of Arriaga and struggled to contain his heartbreak during a press conference Friday afternoon. 
   “He is not coming back, but there’s a lot of people out there that miss him. A lot of law enforcement people that I don’t know worked to make this happen,” he said through his sobs. 
   “I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart. I was waiting for this to happen. I would like to thank you for working day and night to make this happen.” 
   The 33-year-old officer was fatally shot during a gunfire exchange in the early hours of the morning Wednesday, just minutes after radioing in that he was pulling over a gray truck as part of a DUI investigation. He reported shots had been fired around 1 a.m., but the suspect still managed to escape before responders arrived at the site of the shooting in the small city of Newman. 
   Singh, a husband and new father, was transported to a nearby hospital where he was pronounced dead, sparking a three-day manhunt spanning the state of California. 
   Authorities on Thursday issued a heartfelt plea to community for help in capturing Singh’s killer, who police said had two prior DUI arrests. Arriagga claimed to be a member of the Sureno street gang, according to the Sheriff. 
   “Potentially, this could be a capital case,” Christianson said. 
   During an appearance on Fox News Thursday night, the sheriff called on Congress to “depolarize themselves” and to “focus on what’s in the best interest of the American people” when it comes to immigration reform and border security. 
   “Officer Singh really should be the focus of this investigation and his sacrifice. But I also want everyone to know that immigration is good for American when it is done legally,” Christianson said. “Illegal immigration doesn’t serve our communities, especially criminals who victimize and exploit our communities.” 
   He added that Singh, a Fiji native, was the “absolute poster child for why immigration works if done properly and legally.” 
   President Trump took to Twitter earlier in the day to hold up the officer’s death as a reason to “get tough on border security” and “build the wall.”   
