   Law enforcement officers in a small California community battled back tears, at times wrapping their arms around each other, as they issued an emotional plea for the community’s assistance in finding the man accused of gunning down a police officer during a traffic stop. 
   A manhunt for the suspect, believed to be in the country illegally, entered its second day Thursday as the Newman community continued to mourn the death of Cpl. Ronil Singh — the first ever officer with the Newman Police Department to be killed in the line of duty. 
   Authorities have shared images of the suspect, but have not yet released his name to the public. 
   “This is not a big department. This is a department of 12. This is a man I saw every day. This is a man I relieved on Christmas so he could spend the day with his wife and child,” Newman Police Chief Randy Richardson said, his voice breaking several times throughout an afternoon press conference. 
   Singh was shot early Wednesday morning just minutes after radioing in that he was pulling over a gray pickup truck as part of a DUI investigation, according to a press release from Stanislaus County Sheriff’s Department. The 33-year-old officer reported shots had been fired around 1 a.m., drawing multiple agencies to the site of the shooting in Newman, located about 25 miles south of Modesto. 
   “It was a gunfight,” Stanislaus County Sheriff Adam Christianson told reporters. “Cpl. Singh absolutely tried to defend himself against this credible threat.” 
   The suspect managed to flee before responders arrived on the scene, where they discovered Singh suffering from gunshot wounds. The father-of-one was rushed to a nearby hospital and he was later pronounced dead. 
   Richardson said a narcotics dog named Sam was also with Singh when the attack occurred. The fallen officer had dressed up the canine as Mrs. Claus to celebrate the recent holiday. 
   The dog was uninjured in the shootout and is currently with Singh’s wife and infant child. She will be retired despite having some years of service left. 
   “I will not take another member from that family,” Richardson said. 
   A truck believed to have been the one stopped by Singh was found later Wednesday afternoon in the garage of a mobile home park, located about four miles away from where the shooting occurred. 
   Authorities have released images of the suspect, taken from surveillance footage from a nearby convenience store shortly before the attack occurred. The footage also captured the suspect’s vehicle, a gray Ram pickup, matching the description Singh had previously called in. 
   Christianson said investigators have gathered evidence to suggest the wanted man has not yet left Stanislaus County, but declined to provide additional details. 
   “We’re getting closer,” he said. “I like to think we may have him in custody sooner rather than later." 
   Authorities said the suspect should be considered armed and dangerous, advising the community to immediately phone 911 should they come in contact with him. 
   Christianson added his department, which is leading the investigation, “will spare no expense in hunting down this criminal and bringing him to justice.” 
   “We need closure,” Richardson added. “This will never go away, but we need something. A win. We need something so we can move on.” 
   President Trump highlighted the suspect’s immigration status in a Thursday tweet. 
   “There is right now a full scale manhunt going on in California for an illegal immigrant accused of shooting and killing a police officer during a traffic stop,” he wrote. “Time to get tough on Border Security. Build the Wall!” 
   Singh, a Fiji native, joined the Newman Police Department in July 2011. Earlier in his career he worked with the Turlock Police Department and served as a deputy with the Merced County Sheriff’s office. 
   “He came to this country with one purpose and that was to serve this country. He came to America to be a police officer. That is all he wanted to do,” Richardson said. 
   “You ask anybody, he was never in a bad mood. He loved what he did. He loved being a police officer. He loved being a husband. He loved being a father. You have to understand — this wasn’t supposed to happen.”   
