Florence and Mangkhut, Fearsome Storms a World Apart, Start to Release Their Grip
Updated Sept. 18
A pair of powerful storms claimed lives and devastated communities on opposite ends of the earth last weekend: Hurricane Florence, which battered the Carolinas with persistent rain and flooding, and Typhoon Mangkhut, which slammed the northern Philippines and Hong Kong before moving on to mainland China.
Dozens of Times journalists around the world are covering the impact and aftermath of both storms, and we are providing open and unlimited access to our coverage.
Dozens of people have died from Typhoon Mangkhut, which passed over the Philippines this weekend and went on to carve a path through China. Meteorologists described it as the world’s most powerful storm this year.
Retrace Mangkhut’s movement and explore a 3-D model of rainfall within the storm.
The typhoon, which at its peak was equivalent to a Category 5 hurricane with 170-mile-an-hour winds, weakened as it passed over mainland China. But it had already taken a considerable toll.
By late Monday, at least 66 deaths had been attributed to the storm in the Philippines, with that number almost certain to rise, according to an unofficial count from the police. More than 40 bodies there had been recovered from the muddied wreckage of a landslide. Our reporters are on the ground in Itogon, the town where the landslide took place.
In China, the state media reported that at least four people had died in Guangdong, a coastal province. The storm also left a swath of damaged buildings and scores of injuries in Hong Kong and Macau. Here are some photos of the aftermath.
Chaos continued to reign over parts of the Carolinas even as the region emerged from the grip of a storm with a destructive power unlike any the area had seen in a generation.
“This remains a significant disaster that affects much of our state,” Gov. Roy Cooper of North Carolina said on Monday. “The next few days will be long ones as the flooding continues.”
The devastation was wide-ranging.
At least 33 people have died in North and South Carolina because of Florence.
In North Carolina, floodwaters swept away part of a wall holding back a pond of toxic substances and overran several lagoons of pig waste. Tens of thousands were left without power and, in New Bern, N.C., public housing residents wondered what will become of their flooded homes.
In both Carolinas, churches provided literal and spiritual refuge.
If you are in an affected area, here are five things you can do to avoid the dangers of flooding.
Evacuation orders can pose special challenges for the elderly and disabled. Here’s expert advice for those who cannot or will not evacuate.
We also have tips for travelers affected by the storm and advice on how to use technology to your advantage.
And here’s how to help those affected by Florence and what you can do for victims of Mangkhut.
