   The two teams originally favored to compete for an NL East title played meaningless baseball Saturday. 
   But the Nats got revenge on the Mets for playing a role in Washington's elimination from postseason contention a day before, to the tune of a 6-0 win in D.C. 
   The Nationals' loss Friday night, coupled with the Atlanta Braves' win, knocked them out of the NL East race. Then, shortly after Saturday's game began, the St. Louis Cardinals beat the San Francisco Giants on a 10th-inning homer, ending Washington's wild card hopes. 
   Pegged by many to win a third straight division title, the Nationals slid into third place on June 22 and remained there. 
   Nats rookie Austin Voth and four relievers combined on a one-hitter. 
   "He kept us off balance," Mets manager Mickey Callaway said. "He had a good curveball I thought. He was able to throw it for strikes ... and then he got it down when he needed to, and his fastball command was pretty good." 
   Voth, making his second major league start, allowed only an infield single to Michael Conforto leading off the fourth inning. Voth struck out five with two walks in five innings. 
   Meanwhile, Corey Oswalt took the mound for the Mets allowed two runs over five innings. 
   The 25-year-old Oswalt has been serviceable in 16 appearances with the big-league club. 
   “I thought he was pretty good,” Callaway told reporters after the game. “Still trying to get him stretched out and he got up to where we wanted him to. He’ll have one more start and I thought that he threw the ball well.” 
   Matt Wieters and Trea Turner homered for Washington. 
   Even with Saturday's loss, the fourth-place Mets will still come on top the season series between the two rivals. 
   "It stings," manager Dave Martinez said of missing the playoffs. "But we've still got seven more games. ... These guys don't quit. They came out ready to play today." 
   Added Ryan Zimmerman: “I think all of us in here would sit here and tell you we came here every day and did everything we could to try and win,” the first baseman said. “At least I did. Because of that I can go home and be at peace with it. Obviously, it's frustrating. You want to come out and win every year and have a chance to go into the playoffs." 
   Mets: 2B Jeff McNeil was given the day off. 
   Nationals: OF Eaton (sore and stiff left knee) was out of the starting lineup for the fifth time in six games. 
   LHP Steven Matz (5-11, 4.18 ERA) makes his sixth start of the season against the Nationals, who will start RHP Erick Fedde (2-3, 5.02) in the series finale. 
   -- With News Wire Services    
