How Scott Morrison’s Boat Trophy Burst Into Public View — and Why It Matters
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email. Here’s where to find all our Australia and New Zealand coverage.
______
Scott Morrison hadn’t been in the prime minister’s office for long when Maureen Dowd and I arrived to interview him on Sept. 10, but the move-in process looked complete.
The spacious room in Australia’s Parliament building that had belonged to Malcolm Turnbull until his party toppled him on Aug. 24 appeared transformed.
The bookshelves were full, the walls held pictures of Mr. Morrison’s smiling children, and wherever there was space, Mr. Morrison had placed items of personal importance: a rugby ball from his beloved Cronulla Sharks; a shelf of Christian iconography, including a reference to Proverbs 3:5-6, which starts “Trust in the Lord”; and yes, the boat in the photo above.
Since it was mentioned in Maureen’s column on Sunday (“His office features a model migrant boat bearing the proud declaration “I Stopped These,” she wrote), Australian reporters have been trying to uncover its provenance.
When the photo appeared Wednesday, shot during a meeting by Australian Associated Press, the scrutiny intensified.
The Guardian wrote on Wednesday that the item had “sparked curiosity and incredulity, given the long-running and worldwide condemnation of how the Australian government has sought to stop people seeking asylum in Australia by boat.”
BuzzFeed then examined Mr. Morrison’s public gift declarations and found that it was not listed, suggesting “that he either bought the boat for himself, or hasn’t declared the gift on the register of members’ interest for either this term of Parliament or the last term.”
So where did it come from?
Mr. Morrison told a local broadcaster on Wednesday that the memento was a gift from a friend.
“A mate of mine — a constituent, actually — made that for me when I left the immigration portfolio many years ago,” he said on the program “Miranda Devine Live.”
I noticed the trophy as soon as I stepped into his office. I’d been to Manus Island, where hundreds of asylum seekers are still held, and covered Australia’s offshore detention policy up-close, so I found it interesting that he would put the boat on display.
Just as interesting was the fact that it was not the only marker of personal pride in stopping the boats.
I also noticed a cap from the Australian Border Force, on a shelf below the Proverbs plaque, and a large glass trophy from a ceremony for a naval vessel that was presented in 2014 “to the Honourable Scott Morrison MP Minister for Immigration” by Austal, a major defense contractor.
[Sign up for the Australia Letter to get news, conversation starters and local recommendations in your inbox each week.]
All of this suggested that Mr. Morrison would continue to be a strong defender of the policy he helped enact as immigration minister: refusing to accept asylum seekers who try to reach Australia by boat.
Indeed, when we asked him about his plans for the refugee policy, which many legal experts consider a shameful violation of international law, he was quick to respond.
“Well, I was the one who stopped it,” he said, referring to the flow of migrants. “And I’ll tell you the shame of Australia then — 1,200 kids dying and adults dying in the water and the horrific carnage that was taking place and the human misery that I saw.”
He added that Australia takes in tens of thousands of refugees a year through processes that do not involve smuggling people. “We have the track record of being the best resettlers of refugees of anyone in the world,” he said.
But stopping the boats, in his view, was more important than helping the people in detention.
Would he consider new approaches, I asked, such as letting New Zealand follow through on its offer to take a group of refugees from Australia’s offshore detention camps?
“No,” he said. “We don’t think that is consistent with the border protection regime put in place, and we are very concerned that that could risk this thing opening up again.”
Though I didn’t know it would show up in Maureen’s column (news and opinion writers operate separately even when interviews are shared), Mr. Morrison’s boat trophy is indeed a telling symbol: It’s as absolute as he is on the issue.
“If you don’t stop them coming, well, the absolute human carnage continues, and so you have to be very focused, mission focused on that,” he said. “You can’t do things that starts it all off again.”
______
What do you think of Mr. Morrison’s trophy? Share your thoughts in our NYT Australia Facebook group.
Now here are our stories of the week, from all over the world, and on issues we know you care about — including love and crossword puzzles.
______
• So beautiful, so destructive. Check out Typhoon Mangkhut in 3-D, and read about how gold mining contributed to the storm’s death toll.
• Kim Jong-un plans to visit South Korea. “Such a trip,” our correspondent writes, “would be the first by any North Korean leader, another dramatic moment in the flurry of diplomacy around the North’s nuclear weapons program in recent months.”
• Washington is Kavanaugh-obsessed. To catch up and get some context on the sexual assault allegation throwing Judge Brett Kavanaugh’s Supreme Court confirmation into turmoil, just listen to this episode of “The Daily.”
• The new iPhones are here. Our reviewer, after resisting big screens for years, is a convert.
______
Let’s assume you’ve read Ms. Dowd’s column on Mr. Morrison. Here are a few other highlights from our coverage this week:
Features
• Kia ora, world! From rock bands to retirees, the Maori language, once shunned, is having a renaissance in New Zealand.
• Looking for context on the music festival drug deaths? Wondering how other countries deal with this sort of thing? Here’s our thoughtful guide to overdose issues.
• Sydney’s favorite Thai food. Besha Rodell’s latest review tackles Boon Cafe. “The first thing you’ll hear about Boon Cafe in Sydney is that it’s an all-day Thai restaurant inside a grocery store. The second will probably be your enthusiastic informant’s favorite dish.”
Opinion
Lisa Pryor, a Sydneysider through and through, writes about her newfound emphasis on thrift. It’s a cult she says you should join.
Kevin Rudd, Australia’s former prime minister, has a thing or two to say about why democracies need to wake up to the rise of authoritarian capitalism.
______
I’ve gotten into the habit of playing the mini-crossword on my phone each morning with my kids, and it’s even more addictive than I’d expected. It takes only a few minutes and it’s a nice break from the news.
The easiest way to play is in The New York Times app — here’s where to find all The Times’s app downloads for your phone.
And if you’re really ambitious, there’s the full daily crossword. It’s a ritual for many Americans who get The Times in print, and you can print it out or play the digital version — with or without help from our puzzle masters.
______
At a time when the rustic pioneer seems to be trending in global fashion circles, this photo essay on Mennonites in Belize is both compelling viewing and deeply informative reading.
It’s an example of subculture coverage that aims to inform even as it draws you in.
______
... And We Recommend
Many of our Australian readers are already fans of our popular “Modern Love” column. It’s a great read. But did you know you could also listen?
The “Modern Love” podcast includes celebrities reading our most popular essays on love, plus deeper discussions with the “Modern Love” editor.
Check it out wherever you get your podcasts.
