SYDNEY, Australia — Julie Bishop, the popular former Australian foreign minister, said Thursday that she would not run in coming federal elections, adding to the conservative government’s already-bleak image as a place that is inhospitable to women.
Hers is the highest-profile departure in what has become an exodus of women from the government, which is run by a coalition led by the center-right Liberal Party. The departure of several female Liberal lawmakers in recent months has reignited a debate about sexism in Parliament that could shape the next election.
“It’s no secret the Liberal Party has a problem with women,” said Clementine Ford, a feminist commentator. Ms. Ford said she was surprised that Ms. Bishop had remained in the party for as long as she had.
Until last year, Ms. Bishop had been deputy leader of the Liberal Party for more than a decade, standing stalwart while an ever-revolving door for the top job roiled the party and upset voters. In her tenure as deputy, the party had three different male leaders, one of them serving twice.
Last August, Ms. Bishop was one of three candidates who vied for the party’s leadership after Malcolm Turnbull, who was then the prime minister, was ousted in a back-room revolt. Despite having higher public approval ratings than her two male opponents, she lost on the first ballot with less than 13 percent of the vote. Scott Morrison, who was then the treasurer of Australia, was elected by Liberal Party lawmakers as the next prime minister.
After the vote, Ms. Bishop opted to leave the cabinet and become a rank-and-file lawmaker.
Ms. Ford said she did not think “it even occurred” to male party members to elect a woman as their leader. Ms. Bishop was the first woman to formally stand for leader of the Liberal Party.
“She was hugely popular with the electorate,” Ms. Ford said. “To ignore not only her skills and ability and merit, but to do it so blatantly, must have been a huge slap in the face for her.”
Ms. Bishop’s loss in the leadership vote sent waves of relief through the opposition Labor Party, which is favored in polls to win the next election. Though the exact date has not been set, elections must be held this year.
If Ms. Bishop had won, the Labor Party “might have had a real fight on their hands in the next election,” said Jane Caro, an Australian author and commentator. “So the Liberal Party really cut off its own nose to spite its face, but such is the strong belief among many conservative people that women should not be in charge.”
After the leadership vote last summer, Ms. Bishop addressed Parliament and said that women in both chambers had long been subjected to “appalling behavior,” including bullying and sexist comments about their appearance, clothing and personal lives.
“It is evident that there is an acceptance of a level of behavior in Canberra that would not be tolerated in any other workplace in Australia,” she said at the time, referring to the Australian capital.
Julia Banks, another Liberal Party lawmaker, said in August that she was quitting politics after the next election, and called for Parliament to enact a code of conduct to curb inappropriate behavior.
“Women have suffered in silence for too long,” she said.
Women in Australia are underrepresented at the federal level. Of the 58 Liberal members of Parliament, 11 are women, as are eight of the party’s 24 senators. In the Labor Party, 29 of 69 members of Parliament and 14 of 25 senators are women.
Speaking in Parliament on Thursday, Ms. Bishop, 62, said a number of people, including women, had shown interest in running for her seat and that it was time for a new member to take her place.
Her announcement came just over a month after Kelly O’Dwyer, the minister for women and the minister for industrial relations, said she would not run in the next election because she wanted to spend more time with her family.
Ms. O’Dwyer, who was Australia’s youngest female cabinet member and the first sitting cabinet member to give birth, is one of six women holding the top 23 positions in Mr. Morrison’s government.
Since last summer, there has been a growing call for the Liberal Party to adopt quotas promoting women, something the party has so far rejected. The Labor Party, by contrast, aims to have 50 percent female lawmakers by 2025.
Earlier this year, Foreign Minister Marise Payne said that while the Liberal Party should consider quotas, she had not yet decided if she supported the idea.
“I do know that as an organization there is more that we can do,” Ms. Payne told The Sydney Morning Herald. “All options should be on the table. It’s not something which we are ignoring. It’s something which we take very seriously.”
Ms. Bishop was Australia’s first female foreign minister, a role that thrust her in the international spotlight in July 2014, when Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot out of the sky and crashed in Ukrainian territory controlled by pro-Russian rebels. The crash killed all 298 people onboard, including 28 Australians and nine permanent residents.
“Julie’s judgment, determination and energy helped secure a United Nations Security Council resolution that ensured Australia and its partners could repatriate the victims of that terrible crime,” Mr. Morrison said in Parliament on Thursday after Ms. Bishop’s announcement. “Australia has not forgotten those terrible days and still waits for the perpetrators of that crime to be brought to justice.”
It was a sentiment echoed by Bill Shorten, the Labor Party leader.
“If any of us were ever to be privileged to be in the position that she was in, dealing with the Russians and other people, I hope that any of us would show the same strength that she showed. That’s to her everlasting credit,” Mr. Shorten said.
Mr. Turnbull, the former prime minister, said on Twitter that Ms. Bishop had been Australia’s “finest” foreign minister, “eloquent, elegant and always courageous advancing our national interest in these challenging times.”
Ms. Bishop departed the legislature after her farewell speech, before Mr. Morrison and Mr. Shorten spoke their praise.
Along with Ms. Bishop’s political legacy, however, the prime minister made reference to a part of Ms. Bishop’s wardrobe that has dogged the lawmaker much as leopard-print kitten heels have Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain.
“Her successor will have big shoes to fill,” Mr. Morrison said, “and we all know Julie has the best shoes in the Parliament.”
