They’re ‘Blood Brothers’ With Israel’s Jews. But Druse Call New Law a Betrayal.
DALIYAT EL-KARMEL, Israel — On the edge of this Druse village, perched on a quiet green ridge above the Mediterranean, is a national monument to more than 420 Druse soldiers and security force members who have fallen in battle for Israel.
The tiny, Arabic-speaking Druse minority threw its lot in with Jews even before the state was established. In the 70 years since, both groups have called their strategic alliance a “covenant of blood” and described each other as “blood brothers.”
Then, in mid-July, Parliament enacted a basic law, with the weight of a constitutional amendment, declaring Israel “the nation-state of the Jewish people,” built on national self-determination “unique to the Jewish people.” It prioritizes Jewish building and downgrades Arabic from an “official” language alongside Hebrew to one with a “special status.”
Most divisively for Israel’s Arab minority, which makes up 21 percent of the population of nearly nine million, it also omits any mention of democracy or equality for all citizens.
The Druse, a generally quiescent religious group of about 145,000 citizens for whom loyalty to the state is an article of faith, have denounced the legislation as a stinging insult and a betrayal. And now they are spearheading a swelling backlash against the law that is roiling the country and posing a stiff challenge for the right-wing government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
“It’s enough of patting us on the shoulder and saying, ‘You are our brothers, we love you,’” said Shadi Nasraldeen, 45, a native of Daliyat el-Karmel whose brother, Lutfi, an Israeli soldier, was killed during the last war in Gaza, in 2014.
“There has to be full equality in a democratic state,” said Mr. Nasraldeen, who ended a 26-year army career last year and now works at the memorial site, which holds lectures and educational activities. “We are the first to run into battle and the first to die on the flag.”
He added: “It’s as if the Israeli people simply abandoned us. They say they didn’t. But according to the clauses of this law, we don’t exist.”
After at least two Druse officers publicly announced that they were quitting the military, the chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Gadi Eisenkot, wrote a rare letter to his troops on Tuesday, calling on them to leave politics out of the army.
Like Jewish 18-year-olds, Druse men are, by law, conscripted into military service. Though small in numbers, the Druse play an outsize role in Israel’s cherished security establishment, and engender deep sympathy in broader Israeli society.
The outcry from the Israeli Druse has exposed flaws in the law for many Jews who previously accepted it as a natural outgrowth of Zionism.
Dozens of former high-ranking police officers, including eight former police commissioners, signed a letter this week calling for the law to be amended, to give appropriate expression to the status of minorities who help defend the country.
“This law has nothing: It does not have equality, it does not mention ‘all its citizens,’ there is no promise of security for all citizens, no democracy,” Shlomo Aharonishki, one of the former commissioners, said on Army Radio on Tuesday. “It has nothing besides the Jewish people. They are the only ones, and there is nothing other than them.”
The Druse, a sect that split off from Islam 1,000 years ago, have members spread across Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and northern Israel. They do not generally claim common cause with Israeli Arabs or share their Palestinian national identity.
But they argue that equality within Israel must apply across the board, not only to certain groups.
Circassians, a mostly Muslim ethnic group, are also drafted into the Israeli military. Many Bedouin men volunteer, as do smaller numbers of Arab Muslims and Christians. Most ultra-Orthodox Jewish men obtain exemptions from service for Torah study.
“Civil equality has to be added,” said Rafik Halabi, the mayor of Daliyat el-Karmel and a former news director of Israel’s public broadcasting authority. “If you ask me as a citizen, of course equality should be for everyone.”
He and other Druse representatives have held several urgent meetings with Mr. Netanyahu since the law passed, but the prime minister has defended the measure, which he championed.
“The law does not detract at all from the individual rights of anybody,” Mr. Netanyahu said after a meeting with Druse leaders this week. “It is designed to make the necessary legal balance, the time for which has come, in order to ensure the character of the state of Israel.”
He acknowledged the “genuine feelings” of the Druse, but has so far rejected any notion of amending the law. Instead, he has offered to advance benefits for the Druse in areas like building and zoning, which residents of Daliyat el-Karmel said missed the point of their objections.
Mr. Netanyahu has blamed “the Israeli left” for inciting opposition to the law. But his education minister and rival to the right, Naftali Bennett, publicly sided with the Druse protest and called to mend the rift. The center-right finance minister, Moshe Kahlon, said that the legislation had been done “in haste,” though it was discussed for nearly a decade, and that it should be fixed.
A Druse minister from Mr. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud party, Ayoob Kara, also a resident of Daliyat el-Karmel, said he was “proud to be Israeli” and was happy with the law. But other Druse legislators have joined petitions against the law to Israel’s Supreme Court.
To protest the law, hundreds of Israelis showed up for a mass Arabic lesson in a Tel Aviv square on Monday night, and a Jewish political satirist, Tom Aharon, announced that his weekly television program would carry Arabic subtitles at least until the end of the current season. A major demonstration is planned for Saturday.
A Druse journalist, Riad Ali, delivered an impassioned six-minute monologue on the public broadcast channel during a prime-time newsmagazine show, saying the law had “confirmed the killing of my Israeli dream” and had turned Druse soldiers into “mercenaries.” Mordechai Kremnitzer, a former dean of law at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and a senior fellow at the Israel Democracy Institute, a nonpartisan research center, said he was “ashamed” as a “Zionist patriot” and broke down in tears during a radio interview.
Galia Halabi, 43, who works in her family’s toy and bric-a-brac shop in Daliyat el-Karmel’s center, said: “There are no words to describe the pain and sorrow caused to the Druse. In short, it’s shameful.”
In his cellular phone shop and lab in the town’s old core, Anan Shami, 28, said his father had fought in the 1948 and 1967 wars, his brother in the 2006 Lebanon war, and he in Gaza in 2014.
Mustached, and wearing traditional baggy pants and a white cap, he said that Jethro, a chief prophet in the Druse religion, had crossed the Red Sea with Moses, his son-in-law, and “since then we have had a covenant of blood.”
He noted that a Druse police officer was killed during a 2014 Palestinian terrorist attack on a synagogue in Jerusalem, defending strictly Orthodox worshipers who probably did not enlist.
“Tell the war dead in the cemetery that they made you second-class casualties,” Mr. Shami said. “For what were they killed? What did they fight for?”
