Can We Get a Little Joy Over Here?
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter reflecting the experience (and quirks) of our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email. And here’s where to find all our Australia and New Zealand coverage. 
______
My conversations this week with drought-crushed farmers in rural New South Wales, along with our wildly ambitious magazine story on the decade when the world could have stopped climate change but didn’t, got me thinking about the emotions around news and what it often lacks: a little joy and wonder.
Are things getting better or worse? Does the news media focus too much on the latter?
These were the questions running through a thoughtful piece in The New Yorker this week, and I could see a similar struggle in local coverage of the latest results from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey, which showed both positive and negative developments on wages, income and work.
I even saw tributaries of related inquiry in Taffy Brodesser-Akner’s stellar profile of Gwyneth Paltrow in The New York Times Magazine.
Bear with me as I stretch for a connection between Goop and global living, but Taffy’s piece — in addition to being laugh-out-loud funny — also managed to be about wellness, aspiration and the hunger of those already doing fine to do better, to be better, by buying into Paltrow’s whole weird thing because, well, life is terrible and no one gets it anyway, right?
Sigh. Somehow we’re all just trying to find our way, whether it’s with bee stings and junk science (we’re looking at you, Goopers) or through healthier means.
But really, read the profile to the end. It’s terrific, and will make you think and bring you joy.
Believe it or not, joy matters to The New York Times, and to our bureau.
Besha Rodell’s food criticism in Australia Fare is rigorous (all restaurant reviews are based on three anonymous visits) but also meant for fun and nourishment.
Our monthly guides to Netflix Australia are also useful for choosing how to unwind (we hope). Australia Diary, our regular column of reader-submitted stories, draws inspiring anecdotes of hope and triumph, like this week’s essay from Helen McInerney describing her experience of boxing in the outback.
We still cover news, of course, and we’ll soon add a correspondent or two to bring you more in-depth Australia coverage (yes, I want more of that as well). But as the world seems to get angrier, many of us at The Times are also seeking ways to bridge divides and trigger smiles.
For example, did you know that The Times has a weekly newsletter dedicated to good news from all over the world?
Yeah, and if that sounds too light and airy for you, take a look at the kinds of things we include:
• There’s a lake on Mars.
• This British supermarket chain is introducing a “quieter hour” for autistic shoppers.
• New Zealand’s experiment with a four-day workweek was a big success.
• Marriage bureaus in Cyprus are bridging the Israel-Lebanon divide.
It’s not exactly fluff, at least to my eyes.
Now go buy some Goop (or a Times subscription) and check out these stories below as I try to highlight why they’ll each make you see life in a brighter light.
______
Sometimes investigative journalism involves looking at surprising things, like aerial tricks over the water.
When Albee Layer pulled off what looked like an original move on a surfboard, the kings of surfing, skateboarding and snowboarding started arguing — and this interactive uses every tool available, from video to text messaging to interviews, to figure out what’s what.
I’m siding with the surfers.
______
It took a small plane and a long boat ride for me to get to the Seaweed King on his remote island in the South Pacific, but what I found there was a model of hard work and calm in the face of rapidly rising seas.
“People talk about these islands being vulnerable, and along with that they tend to treat the human beings as vulnerable, too,” Simon Albert, a researcher at the University of Queensland, told me. “But in my view, they’re the opposite — they’re strong and resilient.”
Yes, yes they are.
______
It can be disorienting and depressing to feel you’re back at square one with a person you were once close to.
But friendships are hard. And this article aims to help.
______
Don’t let the headline fool you. This Op-Ed, our most popular this week, is a cri de coeur against over-protective, judgmental parenting.
Yes, you can leave your kids in the car for a minute. Yes, you can let them walk to school. And yes, there are more parents stepping up and telling the fearmongers: Go back to your corners.
______
Thanks to all of you who responded to my request for guidance on new beats and themes last week. The input is greatly appreciated.
This week, I’ve got a literary recommendation that lines up with our joy and wonder theme, sort of. It’s “Pachinko,” the novel by Min Jin Lee, which chronicles four generations of an ethnic Korean family, first in Japanese-occupied Korea in the early 20th century, then in Japan itself from the runup to World War II and beyond.
It doesn’t sound like fun, but our critics selected it as one of best books of 2017 and there’s a humanity and warmth to the story, writing and characters that makes it feel like a cozy warm blanket (as my very smart wife put it).
I’m not quite finished yet, but I agree. It’s a family saga more about human connections than history, even as conflict and occupation intervene.
Here’s The Times’s review.
