In a Chemical Weapons Debate, Russia Tries to Change the Subject
LONDON — Russia demonstrated on Tuesday that one response to fielding an unwelcome question is to ask a different question. And another, and another, and many more after that.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is meeting in The Hague to decide whether to start determining who was to blame for chemical weapons attacks, rather than just saying whether they occurred.
The change, proposed by Britain, is clearly aimed at Russia and its ally, Syria, two countries recently accused of using chemical weapons, which they deny. Both oppose the measure.
But before it could take up the merits of the proposal, the organization spent hours batting down questions and objections from the Russian delegation — and, to a lesser extent, from representatives of Syria and its other main ally, Iran — about how a vote would be conducted. That vote is expected to take place on Wednesday.
In proceedings broadcast on the organization’s website, they asked questions whose answers were clear, questions that the organization said it had answered before the meeting, and questions that were answered (often twice, or three or four times) during the meeting. Even as some Western representatives expressed impatience, the Russians repeatedly challenged the organization’s interpretation of its own rules.
It took almost three hours for member countries of the organization, which monitors compliance with a chemical weapons ban treaty, just to vote to adopt a meeting agenda.
“The picture is not very understandable and clear,” said Alexander V. Shulgin, the Russian ambassador. “When there is such confusion, we can’t move forward.”
The Canadian ambassador, Sabine Nölke, retorted: “Canada is not confused. The rules are clear.”
The Russians “have made it quite clear they intend to dispute everything,” said Ambassador Kenneth D. Ward of the United States.
For two years, there was an international system for assigning blame for chemical attacks, but Russia killed it. In response to Syria’s long civil war, and repeated allegations that the government had used poison gas, the United Nations created a body, the Joint Investigative Mechanism, to work with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and determine culpability.
Last year, it reported that the government of Bashar al-Assad had used poison gas in Syria. Russia rejected that assertion, accusing the group of being a tool of Western propaganda, though Western countries and independent watchdog groups contend that Syria has used chemical weapons dozens of times, and rebel groups a smaller number of times.
In November, Russia used its veto in the United Nations Security Council to block renewal of the group’s mandate.
Britain has accused the Kremlin of carr
