Journalist’s Footage Shows Iraqi Forces Torturing Civilians, ABC Report Says
Video smuggled out of Iraq by an Iraqi journalist and broadcast by ABC News on Thursday appears to show members of an Iraqi special forces unit — one that has been praised by the United States — torturing and executing civilians in Mosul during a campaign against the Islamic State last year.
On Friday, a spokesman for the U.S. military coalition in Iraq and Syria said that it was aware of the journalist’s claims and had raised them with the Iraqi government.
“We take all allegations of human rights abuses very seriously and we immediately, as we did with this particular case, flag that and present it and give it to the government of Iraq for their action,” the spokesman, Col. Ryan S. Dillon, said at a news conference in London on Friday.
The disturbing footage appears to show uniformed Iraqi soldiers beating Iraqi civilians and hanging one man from the ceiling by his wrists while demanding they confess to working with the Islamic State. Iraqi officials have called for an investigation into the violence.
The journalist who took the video, Ali Arkady, embedded with the unit over the course of several months last year as it battled the Islamic State. ABC News said on Thursday that Mr. Arkady had received death threats from the soldiers implicated in the footage and had fled Iraq to seek asylum in Europe.
Mr. Arkady told ABC he originally had intended to do a story on how Sunni and Shiite soldiers worked together in the unit, the Emergency Response Division of Iraq’s Ministry of Interior, to fight ISIS. He previously embedded with the unit when it helped push the Islamic State out of Falluja and made a video at that time, “Happy Baghdad,” that portrayed the division positively.
Mr. Arkady told ABC News that the unit’s commanding officers believed he would make another favorable video. But after the commanders grew to trust him, they invited him to take footage as they tortured civilians and coerced them into confessing to working with the Islamic State, confessions that Mr. Arkady believed to be false.
He also said that he twice obeyed commands from the division’s leaders to strike detainees, because he felt he had no choice.
“I said to myself why would he ask me to do that? And I said maybe if I say no they will harm me,” Mr. Arkady said in an interview with The New York Times through a translator. In both instances, he slapped the detainees in the face, he said.
Soon after those incidents, when Mr. Arkady learned of what he believed to be the killing of innocent civilians, he decided to flee the country and share what he recorded.
“I decided to publish it because some of the people who were killed could be ISIS members, but others were simply civilians,” he said.
The Toronto Star, in Canada, and Der Spiegel, in Germany, also published stories about Mr. Arkady’s reporting alongside the photos and video he recorded.
Capt. Omar Nazar, one of the commanders of the special forces unit, declined to dispute the authenticity of the tapes in a phone interview with ABC News last week. He said the brutal tactics caught on video were justified because the victims had connections to the Islamic State.
“We do not want war prisoners in our fight against ISIS,” he told ABC News. “We don’t take prisoners.”
The United States has praised the Emergency Response Division as recently as January. In a briefing with reporters at that time, United States Army Col. Brett Sylvia, the commander of Task Force Strike in Baghdad, said the unit was “a very effective fighting force” and had recently been advised by American officers.
“This is the first time that we have advised them,” Colonel Sylvia said at the time. “And it has been really a fruitful partnership in all regards.”
But accusations of sectarian abuses have long plagued Iraqi forces and have caused concern as the battle for Mosul, a predominantly Sunni city, has dragged on.
No American military advisers appear on the video. But ABC News said that one of the men shown torturing two civilians — who Mr. Arkady said were half brothers — claimed to be a United States military interpreter and contractor.
ABC News said the American embassy and American commanders in Baghdad declined requests to appear on camera, but told the network they had no knowledge of the abuses captured on tape.
“The U.S. has not provided military aid, arms or assistance to the Emergency Response Division,” Kim Dubois, a United States embassy spokeswoman in Baghdad, told ABC News in a statement.
Colonel Dillon said on Friday that U.S. forces were not involved with the Iraqi unit with which Mr. Arkady had worked.
“We did not have U.S. advisers with this particular unit at this time,” he said.
