Want the Australia Letter by email? Sign up and forward it to friends so we can expand our discussion about Australia and the world.
______
Innovators come in many forms. Take Tom Smith. He’s a pig farmer in rural Victoria, a quiet man with a white beard who you’d walk right by in Bunnings without even noticing.
But in 2008, without any guidance, he went out on a limb and posted a help wanted ad in a Manila newspaper. Then he went there, found a few people he liked and started sponsoring worker visas.
It was a bold if simple act that has led dozens of Filipino families to move to a town called Pyramid Hill — reversing population decline, and laying the groundwork for a model of multiculturalism far healthier than what can be found in many cities.
“When you’re desperate, it’s just what you do,” Tom told me when we first met. But it wasn’t just that. There was a glint of mischief in his eye. “I saw it as a bit of a challenge,” he said, smiling, “to try and do something different.”
That urge to break the mold, to resist conformity and decline, ran through the story I wrote about Pyramid Hill’s transformation.
The article was Part 2 of a series we published this week about regional Australia — Part 1 focused on the tragedy of farmer suicides — and I hope you’ll read both stories if you haven’t yet. They’re an attempt by our bureau to cover oft-overlooked issues and areas with depth and nuance.
But here in this week’s newsletter, I also wanted to highlight Tom and his efforts because they amount to a personal challenge.
What he and many others in Pyramid Hill have done is stretch beyond their comfort zones. Both Anglos and Filipinos have gone out of their way to bring people together. They cheer each others children on. They help each other when tragedies hit. They share meals together, often.
And in conversations from the pub to the piggery, I heard both pride and frustration: pride, because people felt that what they had learned about how to build a multicultural community should be applied more broadly; frustration, because small-town views are so often ignored.
Canberra, they said, was too focused on petty squabbles and the problems with immigration. City elites, they added, rarely invest much time in engaging with people who are different.
“City people are so wrapped up in their own world,” said Gail Smith, the breeding supervisor at Kia-Ora, the pig farm Tom runs with his sons. “They need to broaden their horizons.”
Many of the Filipinos I met in Pyramid Hill agreed, having moved from cities like Brisbane.
Their comments made me think not just of my own life in Sydney, but also New York — a diverse but highly segregated city by race and income, where people often think they’re open-minded simply because they share a subway car with people from different backgrounds.
In fact, it takes quite a lot more than proximity to create social cohesion — a society that truly reflects the Enlightenment principle of equality for all.
Australia does plenty of academic research on the subject. There are some inspiring speeches to be found from government officials, too — like this one from 2015. There are even sizable grants for projects that address social cohesion.
But Pyramid Hill speaks to something else: the power of individual actions, sustained over time.
At the end of the day, many people told me, countries — like towns, or city neighborhoods, or even sports teams — only cohere when people prioritize getting to know each other and looking out for each other.
I keep coming back to what Tom told me when I asked why Pyramid Hill seemed to be so integrated, with connections spanning ethnic boundaries and conversations that go beyond platitudes or conventional wisdom.
“People in the country mix, and need to mix,” he said. “It’s just different out here; it’s the only way to survive.”
Something to chew on.
______
Before we dive into the week’s stories you shouldn’t miss, along with a recommendation, a bit of community housekeeping is in order:
• Many of you shared fantastic lists of Top 5 things you love about Sydney (and one you loathe). We’ll be back soon with a creative treatment of a few of our favorites.
• We’re trying something a little different in the NYT Australia Facebook group next week. Liminal, a Melbourne-based magazine that publishes art by and interviews with talented Asian Australians, will be “taking over” the group for a week (starting Monday) to lead some really interesting and inclusive discussions about race, identity and Australia. Join the group now if you haven’t already — we’d love you to get involved throughout the week.
______
I loved this little story about London’s red telephone booths being refashioned in creative ways, with books, businesses and other creative ideas.
And of course, we’ve had LOTS of coverage about London’s other news: the royal wedding. A rundown of everything we did can be found on our special Royal Wedding Collection page.
______
This story about why you should stop being so hard on yourself was among the most read New York Times articles all week, globally and in Australia.
One really interesting tip: When you’re stressed, talk to yourself the way your friends would talk to you.
______
The latest on North Korea?
North Korea said on Thursday that it would reconsider holding a summit meeting between its leader, Kim Jong-un, and President Trump, singling out Vice President Mike Pence for remarks that a top official called “ignorant and stupid.”
______
There are always so many stories about President Trump in The New York Times (as you all know) so this week I’m introducing a new occasional feature called Trump of the Week — one link you shouldn’t miss.
It’s for people who have time for only one Trump experience, or maybe those who dip in and out of Trumpworld and want help keeping up.
This week, it’s a video that tries to answer the core question at the heart of the special counsel investigation: How will President Trump fare in the end?
Take a look, and tell me what you think of this Trump of the Week idea by emailing nytaustralia@nytimes.com. Or if there are parts of The Times you’d like curated, through my particular lens (sorry that’s all I’ve got!), let me know.
______
Regional Australia Series
• A Booming Economy With a Tragic Price: Australia is a breadbasket to the world and a globalization success story. So why are its farmers killing themselves?
• Australia’s Immigration Solution: Small-Town Living: How rural Australia opened itself to the world and became a model of integration and revival.
News
• In Australia, Fears of Chinese Meddling Rise on U.N. Bribery Case Revelation: An Australian politician identified Chau Chak Wing, an Australian citizen of Chinese descent, as a co-conspirator in a 2015 bribery case.
• With Senator’s Snub, Australia Gets Stood Up by U.S. — Again: Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee declined to become the ambassador, just weeks after President Trump’s previous choice was reassigned. Should Australia be taking this personally?
• Australian Archbishop Philip Wilson Guilty of Sexual Abuse Cover-Up: He became the highest-ranking Catholic official to be convicted of concealing child sexual abuse, and could face two years in prison.
Culture / Fun
• Courtney Barnett Faces Doubts and Doubters on ‘Tell Me How You Really Feel’: Newly unguarded, the songwriter sets aside her sly character studies in favor of declarations and confrontations on her second solo studio album.
• Big Things and Long Goodbyes: A poem remembering a last road trip taken together before a long separation.
• A Very Hungry Black Hole Is Found, Gorging on Stars: Astronomers in Australia say they have discovered a fast-growing black hole swallowing stars in a baby galaxy 12 billion light-years from here.
______
At sunrise this morning, hundreds of Sydneysiders (including me, my wife and our two kids) gathered at Bondi Beach to raise awareness and finance research for brain cancer by trying to set a world record of the largest gathering of people wearing beanies (winter hats for all you Americans), in support of the Mark Hughes Foundation.
We discovered the organization through the death of Matt Callander and the way that his friends, supporters and neighbors have rallied to the cause has been an inspiration. We’ve purchased many beanies for brain cancer, and encourage others to do the same.
Here’s my Instagram post from the gathering this morning, a moment of community love drawn from sorrow.
