Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
Walking through Melbourne this week, I saw rainbow flags in storefronts, restaurants and on the front of old brick churches — all in support of a “yes” vote in the postal plebiscite about same-sex marriage that went out this week.
We’ve covered this issue closely from the start. We’ve scrutinized the expensive, nonbinding process, deconstructed a popular TV ad from the “no” side and covered the court decision letting the vote proceed, and this week, we explored the experience of gay parents and the chasm between their routine daily lives and the intense political debate about their families.
What’s been quite striking in all of this is the degree to which the opponents of same-sex marriage have sought to shift the focus from marriage to kids and male and female identity.
As Matt Canavan, the conservative senator from the state of Queensland, wrote in an email to his constituents on Wednesday: “If we remove gender from the wedding registry, the next step will be to remove the distinct concept of boys and girls from the classroom.”
This slippery slope argument is familiar; it’s what opponents of same-sex marriage in the United States also relied on.
It didn’t win over a majority there (opposition to same-sex marriage in the U.S. has been declining since 2001, as this Pew Research report shows) and here, a Fairfax/Ipsos poll found this week that around 70 percent of Australians would vote in favor of same-sex marriage in the government’s survey.
But there are larger debates about gender and identity going on as well.
Consider the news that girls at public schools in Western Australia will now be allowed to wear pants and shorts to class, not just dresses, skirts or skorts. The uniform rules were changed only after an 11-year-old girl wrote a letter to education officials that said it was unfair that her brothers could wear shorts and she could not.
“I really love kicking the footy, netball and doing handstands at recess and lunch,” she wrote. “It is annoying doing these things in a skirt.”
Victoria quickly followed suit, announcing that the state’s public schools would be required to provide nonskirt options for female students by the start of next year.
But these uniform restrictions are still the norm in public and private schools across much of Australia, with some defending them as a way to prepare girls for the workplace, where they’ll be expected to wear dresses.
To my outsider eyes, the skirt discussion has been a bit surprising. In the U.S., dressing up for work has been out of style for years. Here, the expectation that girls should be wearing skirts is one of many things (overheard conversations by men in bars wearing fancy suits also come to mind) suggesting that rigid ideas of male and female roles are still quite potent in Australia.
Many argue that this feeds into a larger problem of inequality. At a forum I attended this week at Deakin University in Melbourne about diversity in media, several academics and journalists said that despite its “fair go” ethos, Australia is still a country in which the power structures do not reflect the diversity of the population, in terms of race, sexual identity, or gender.
“We need unconscious bias training for everyone,” said Tracey Spicer, the well-known TV anchor, after recounting a litany of sexist encounters. “We need more female leaders.”
Jane de Hollander, the vice chancellor of Deakin University, put it more simply: “Australians are not as egalitarian as we think,” she said.
And to emphasize the mental blind spots that can develop as a result, she ended her lecture with a question: “Does anyone in the room know who is Australia’s only female Nobel Prize winner?”
There were more than 100 people there, most of them journalists or Ph.D.-holding professors. Not a single hand was raised.
“Elizabeth Blackburn,” Ms. de Hollander said, explaining that she is a geneticist who won the prize in 2009 for her groundbreaking work involving chromosomes.
“She is one of the most significant thought leaders in the world,” she said. “And we don’t know who she is.”
Do you have a story of being overlooked? A tale of unequal demands or expectations about clothing or behavior at work? Or a tale of fighting for greater equality, and winning?
Tell us how these issues are playing out in your own lives, by emailing us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com. We’ll be discussing this in our subscriber Facebook group as well.
As usual, don’t forget to share this newsletter if you like it, and tell your friends to sign up. For a daily fix of global and Australian news, we also have the morning briefing, arriving in inboxes every weekday.
Now on to a few stories you might have missed this week, and a recommendation... from the wilderness of Twitter.
______
Lest anyone think the United States has its sexism problem licked, there’s this sordid tale of a Silicon Valley start-up named SoFi. It’s been valued at $4 billion. And the frat boy culture described in our reporters’ interviews with more than 30 current and former employees goes far beyond even the bad-boy behavior found at other Silicon Valley companies such as Uber. Germany is also an interesting case study in the inertia of sexism, despite the symbolism of Angela Merkel.
______
Trying to catch up or make sense of what’s going on with the Rohingya refugee crisis in Myanmar? This explainer should help. And did I mention that we’ve added two new correspondents in Southeast Asia? Meet Ben Solomon, a multimedia journalist who was part of the New York Times team that won a Pulitzer for Ebola coverage, and Hannah Beech, a trilingual talent we recently hired from Time magazine. They’re both based in Bangkok, and they’re both terrific.
______
In this week’s magazine, Jim Rutenberg, our media columnist and a longtime political correspondent, takes us inside Russia’s (dis)information war against the West. It’s a harrowing tale about how media transformation creates global vulnerabilities.
______
We don’t just do news at The New York Times. We also do Smarter Living, and that often means helping readers stay healthy. This week, we go deep on the scientific value of getting up from your desk and standing. Often. Just a quick jump every 30 minutes could keep you from dying young. Oh, and we also tell you how to embrace getting old.
______
In last week’s newsletter, I asked you to share your delightful urban moments, for a project we’re developing that’s inspired by the longstanding New York feature called Metropolitan Diary. Many of you answered the call. We’re working through the submissions and making plans for how to roll them out. In the meantime, keep sending us anecdotes as they happen or when they come to mind. We’re especially interested in tales (or drawings or photos) that capture an experience of spring and summer. You know how to find us: nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
Finally, something short to deepen your Times-ian experience: @NYTMinusContext. It’s a Twitter account that pulls out snippets of New York Times articles and posts them, without saying what story they come from.
My recent favorites include: “menaced by bloodsucking carrots,” and “Albert Einstein might have been an alien.”
They’re like little drops of brain caramel from the cloud.
I prefer them as is, but if you do want to discover the source of such literate wisdom, you’re in luck: someone launched @NYTPlusContext, which replies to each tweet with a link to the source.
