   It was love at first fight for Sean Avery and Elisha Cuthbert, according to the controversial former Ranger's memoir "Ice Capades." 
   Confidential has obtained an advance copy of the hard-hitting tome, due out Oct. 24, and one of the many amazing stories in it has Avery delving into his relationship with Cuthbert, with whom he bonded during a brawl at a party being thrown by Paris Hilton in L.A. 
   According to Avery, he went to the party as a third wheel, tagging along with "The Girl Next Door" star and her boyfriend at the time, Justin Timberlake BFF Chase Ayala. He'd been friends with both of them for a while already. 
   Avery writes that at that soiree, Hilton's assistant gave him a pat on the bottom, which he welcomed, before responding with a "healthy, firm and flirtatious slap to Paris' ass." One thing led to another and Hilton's date punched Avery, he writes. Cuthbert's then-boyfriend, Ayala, socked Hilton's beau in response. 
   Cut to 17 hours later, Avery is in the emergency room with Cuthbert while a doctor explains that the hand surgery on Ayala has gone well. That's when Avery said he started developing feelings for Cuthbert. A short time later, she and Ayala broke up and Avery successfully made his move. That romance ended when Avery decided he wanted to live in NYC and Cuthbert stayed on the West Coast. 
   Back in Manhattan, Avery started hanging out at Bungalow 8, where he partied with Scarlett Johansson, whom he claims to have taken on a few dates. Avery eventually ended up opening his own sports bar in Tribeca, where he met model Hillary Rhoda. Avery wrote that when she walked in, he leaned over to the bar's manager and said, 'That's the woman I'm going to marry.' That's exactly what happened in 2015. 
   Avery also writes in his memoir about a forgettable meeting with Los Angeles Lakers star Kobe Bryant, whom he asked to sign a basketball at a west coast gym. 
   "He didn't even meet my eyes when he said 'No,'" according to Avery. And when Avery nervously met Anna Wintour and Michael Bloomberg at the MetBall, he accidentally referred to them as "Mrs. Bloomberg" and "Mr. Wintour." 
   With Nicki Gostin, Brian Niemietz   
