When I read Richard Flanagan’s essay “Does Writing Matter?” from October’s issue of The Monthly, I was blown away — not just by the force of his argument, which I’d be a fool to try to sum up here because I’d only water it down, but also by the way he brought readers along.
Not many writers I know can craft coherence while running through (in order, in the first 1,000 words) BuzzFeed, Gutenberg, the Reformation, the Enlightenment, Kafka, Goethe and Shakespeare. He then went on to rain bile on the “great American novel” for leading to “books so huge that, like large plastic bags, they ought to be issued with warnings of death by asphyxiation if you take them to bed to read.”
Suddenly grateful (never again will I feel a need to read “The Recognitions”), I called Richard in Tasmania to discuss which pitfalls to watch out for as we expand our coverage of Australia and what to pursue with zeal. He’s far from the only person I’ve been talking to as our bureau gets going, but our conversation and his follow-up email stuck with me. His words were encouraging in terms of what we’re aiming to do, but also bracing, as he dished out a verbal shot of strong whiskey, aiming to correct the Americanist urge to assume that shared language and sunny weather signify shared history and simple commonalities.
In addition to my regular roundup of recent Times articles, and a recommendation from our own Jacqueline Williams, both found below, I figured I’d share some of that conversation.
Here are a few of Richard’s sharpest comments. The boldface emphasis is mine.
Tell us what you think at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
______
A quick roundup of favorite reads this week:
★ Waleed Aly, well known to many of you perhaps from “The Project,” has been receiving regular assignments from The Times’s Opinion editors, and his analysis of Australia’s flirtation with Trumpism and migrant demonization deserves a close read.
★ The Turnbull-Netanyahu lovefest; a plane crash in Melbourne; and the war on junk food across Asia – just another week in regional news.
★ What makes someone American? The questions of identity in Hyphen-Nation, the last multimedia project I worked on before leaving New York, go beyond U.S. borders.
★ “Rudeness itself is not the calamity,” Rachel Cusk writes in a lyrical work of deep contemplation on politeness, Brexit and human nature. “It is the harbinger, not the manifestation, of evil.”
★ Is China pushing Trump to talk to North Korea? Sure looks like it.
★ Top stories among Times readers in Australia and New Zealand: A  column on Maya Angelou’s theory that most women marry other people’s husbands. And of course, a slide show of photos from the Grammys (which I found messy in production, but livelier than usual).
I’ve had a bunch of conversations lately with Australians — including some readers of this newsletter — who recently moved back to Oz after years away. Jacqueline Williams, my colleague, is one of them, and in addition to asking her about what’s been most striking upon return (the weather, of course) I also slipped in this question:
What’s your favorite spot, the one you thought of when you were living outside Australia?
Her answer: “A magical little place on the south coast of NSW called Rosedale. Don’t tell anyone.”
Too late!
Tell me your favorite spot, and whatever else I should know, at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
