SÃO PAULO, Brazil — A federal judge on Thursday ordered former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil to surrender to the authorities by Friday afternoon to start serving a 12-year prison sentence on a corruption conviction.
The warrant was issued hours after the country’s top court rejected Mr. da Silva’s bid to remain free while appeals of the conviction were considered.
A federal judge, Sérgio Moro, wrote in the arrest warrant that Mr. da Silva would be held in a special cell, outside of the general prison population, in consideration of the “dignity of the office he held.” Mr. da Silva will be allowed to surrender to the federal police in the southern city of Curitiba, where his trial was held, Judge Moro said. He set Friday at 5 p.m. as the deadline.
Mr. da Silva’s Workers’ Party remained defiant on Thursday, vowing that he would still run for a third term in October, despite the Supreme Federal Court’s 6-to-5 ruling early Thursday that he could not remain free pending further appeals.
The president of the Workers’ Party, Senator Gleisi Hoffmann, told journalists that Mr. da Silva had not given up on his quest to return to the presidency. “Lula remains our candidate, first of all because he is innocent,” she said. “If he is jailed, we will consider him a political prisoner and we will be by his side.”
Mr. da Silva, 72, kept a low profile on Thursday, receiving a string of visitors in his office at the Lula Institute in São Paulo, including party leaders and his handpicked successor, former President Dilma Rousseff.
While Mr. da Silva is not the first Brazilian leader engulfed in scandal — former President Fernando Collor de Mello stepped down to avoid being impeached in 1992 and Ms. Rousseff was impeached on charges of manipulating the budget to hide economic problems — his fall is striking nonetheless. He left office eight years ago with a record approval rating of 87 percent, and he has held an ample lead in polls for October’s presidential election.
Mr. da Silva’s imminent imprisonment also sends a chilling message to other prominent political figures caught up in corruption investigations. The threat of jail time has been one of the most important tools in the large-scale investigation known as Lava Jato, or Car Wash, which has ensnared not only Mr. da Silva, but also dozens of business and political leaders, including President Michel Temer.
Last July, Mr. da Silva was convicted on corruption and money laundering charges and sentenced to almost 10 years in prison. In January, an appeals court unanimously upheld the conviction and increased the sentence to 12 years. Mr. da Silva maintains that the prosecution was an underhanded ploy masterminded by rivals to keep him off the ballot.
The Supreme Federal Court, in denying Mr. da Silva’s request to remain free, upheld a 2016 ruling that allows trial judges to jail defendants after an initial appeal has been rejected.
Ms. Hoffmann, who also faces corruption charges, said her party’s first course of action will be to pressure the court to revisit a constitutional question: whether defendants may be imprisoned before they have exhausted all appeals.
Brazil’s Constitution says that “no one will be considered guilty until all of the appeals of the criminal conviction have been exhausted.” Until 2016, when the courts reconsidered the issue, defendants with money and influence could drag out their prosecution for years without going to jail.
During the court hearing, which began on Wednesday and stretched into early Thursday, some of the justices suggested that they were open to revisiting the issue outside Mr. da Silva’s case, which subjected them to tremendous pressure from supporters and critics of the former leader.
In a statement, Mr. da Silva’s defense team declared that the court’s decision contravenes the presumption of innocence guaranteed in the Constitution, violating “the dignity of the human person and other fundamental guarantees.”
Thursday’s ruling had no direct bearing on Mr. da Silva’s eligibility as a candidate. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal will determine the eligibility of candidates starting in August, and it is widely expected to reject Mr. da Silva’s bid under the “clean slate” law, which deems candidates unfit to run if they have been convicted of a crime and lost an appeal.
Mr. da Silva could appeal the electoral court’s decision. Experts say his chances of making it onto the ballot are slim to none — but some think that could work in his party’s favor.
“They have the victim card on their side, they’re going to play that,” said Monica de Bolle, a Brazil expert at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
According to Lincoln Secco, a historian at the University of São Paulo who has studied the evolution of the Workers’ Party, Mr. da Silva will ultimately select and support a replacement candidate, and can rally support by presenting himself as a political prisoner.
“He will connect his arrest to a condemnation of the ideas he supports, of his social policies,” Mr. Secco said.
