Taiwan’s Diplomatic Isolation Increases as Dominican Republic Recognizes China
HONG KONG — The Dominican Republic says it has established ties with China, a move that furthers the international isolation of Taiwan, with which it simultaneously severed diplomatic relations.
The decision was announced by Flavio Darío Espinal, an adviser to the government of the Dominican Republic, and the foreign ministers of China and the Dominican Republic signed a joint communiqué on Tuesday morning in Beijing.
Mr. Espinal emphasized the likelihood of increased trade after establishing formal relations with China, which has the world’s second largest economy, and the prospect of making the Dominican Republic a destination for Chinese tourists.
He said that despite not having official ties, trade between the two countries was worth about $2 billion, making the Dominican Republic China’s second-largest trading partner in Central America and the Caribbean.
“Now that we have established diplomatic relations, the growth potential of our commercial ties is immense,” he told reporters Monday evening.
China considers Taiwan to be part of its territory and has long sought to reduce the number of countries that recognize it while blocking its participation as an observer in United Nations agencies.
While that effort eased during the 2008-16 presidency of Ma Ying-jeou, who favored closer relations with China, it resumed with the election of his successor, Tsai Ing-wen. As president, Ms. Tsai has been more cautious toward China. She has declined to endorse the so-called 1992 Consensus that Taiwan and the mainland are part of “one China,” allowing each side its own interpretation of what that means.
Beijing has put more pressure on her government and begun chipping away at the small number of states that formally recognize Taiwan as a country. In early 2016, shortly before Ms. Tsai took office, Beijing re-established ties with Gambia, which had maintained diplomatic relations with Taiwan for nearly two decades. Later that year Beijing established ties with São Tomé and Príncipe after the island nation off the west coast of Africa broke with Taiwan.
Last year Panama switched from Taipei to Beijing, a move signaling that other countries in Central America and the Caribbean, where Taiwan counts several allies, could follow.
Eighteen countries and the Vatican still recognize Taiwan. The Vatican in particular has been watched closely for signs it could switch, as China’s historically confrontational ties with the Roman Catholic Church have eased somewhat in recent months.
“Today’s event will create a stream of diplomatic switching from Taipei in a matter of months, if not in years,” Richard W. Hu, a professor of politics at the University of Hong Kong, said in an email. Beijing no longer observes the “diplomatic truce” of the Ma Ying-jeou era, and “will continue to pull Taiwan’s diplomatic partners away in years to come.”
China has made blunt shows of force, including military drills in the Taiwan Strait last month that officials said were planned with Taiwan in mind.
But the Dominican Republic’s switch shows that China has the diplomatic means to pressure Taiwan as well, said Ross Feingold, a Taipei-based senior adviser at DC International Advisory, a political risk consultancy.
“We shouldn’t lose sight of the fact that China can be a bully, but they also have their legal channels as well to make the point about their claims to sovereignty over this island,” he said.
Ms. Tsai posted a message on Twitter on Tuesday saying that Taiwan would “never bow to pressure from Beijing.”
“I want to make clear: We will continue to safeguard our #freedom & #democracy,” she wrote on Twitter. “We will defend our own national interests.”
“#Taiwan cherishes relations with all diplomatic allies, but we will not engage in #DollarDiplomacy,” she added in a second message.
Ms. Tsai’s office said it regretted the decision by the Dominican Republic but put the blame on Beijing’s “continued use of financial assistance to harm my country’s friendly ties with its allies,” according to a written statement.
Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs noted its past assistance to increase the Dominican Republic’s rice exports and technology industry. It said there was a “lack of follow-through on China’s promises to former diplomatic allies of Taiwan,” including an unfulfilled pledge to build highways and a refinery in Costa Rica and provide $140 million in aid to São Tomé and Príncipe.
Wang Yi, China’s foreign minister, described the Dominican Republic’s shift as part of a broader trend in Beijing’s favor.
“This important and correct decision is in full compliance with the fundamental interest of the Dominican Republic and its people,” he said, according to a statement from China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs paraphrasing his comments.
“It is fully keeping with the trend of history and developments of the times,” he added.
