State Party Takes Aim at Hijabs for Children. Also  Australian Is Shot in U.S., and Julie Bishop on Trump.
The Breakdown puts a selection of Australia’s daily news into context. Today’s picks:
• A state party in Queensland has urged a ban on head scarves for girls under 10.
• An Australian woman was fatally shot by police officers in the U.S. over the weekend.
• Foreign minister comments on President Trump commenting on women.
In France, it was the burkini that courted controversy. In Australia, over the weekend, it was the hijab. Delegates at the Queensland convention for the opposition Liberal National Party passed an emergency resolution Sunday urging a ban on head scarves for girls under 10, according to the Australian Associated Press.
The resolution, which is nonbinding, came after the failure of proposals that called for a ban on immigration from countries with Sharia, or Islamic law, and another that sought the prohibition of clothing that obscures the face.
Brooke Patterson, a delegate from Southport State Electoral Council, introduced the hijab ban measure and said, as a member of a school parent group, she had been to asked to design appropriate school uniforms with “sexual modesty coverings.”
“We need to debate this now, otherwise in three months there will be a Muslim uniform in state schools in Queensland,” Ms. Patterson said.
Other delegates, like Wendy Ko from Surfers Paradise, opposed the measure. “I don’t think anyone has the right to tell an Islamic family how to raise their daughter,” she said.
Hana Assafiri, a social and community activist and Muslim feminist from Melbourne, called the proposed ban ridiculous and bizarre.
“What do you do, pull over kids and say, How old are you?” she asked. “It’s an insult to the very thing that makes us human.”
She defended the right of Australians to wear the hijab, denouncing seeing “the hijab as a tool or a source of negativism, oppression, violence, terrorism, which essentially this conversation is fraught with.”
“For me, the hijab is about faith, onto which a lot of neuroses are projected,” she said, asking, “Why have we made it a symbol of freedom?”
[4:05 p.m.]
An Australian woman was fatally shot in Minneapolis on Saturday by police officers who did not have their body cameras turned on, officials said.
Justine Damond, a yoga and meditation practitioner, was shot as the officers were responding to her 911 call of an assault near her home in the Fulton neighborhood of Minneapolis. Ms. Damond, 40, who was from Sydney and who also went by the name Justine Ruszczyk, was engaged to be married to an American man, according to Australian news reports.
“They were so in love,” said Matt Omo, a close friend and a founder of his own wellness practice in Australia, who often collaborated with Ms. Damond on meditation and personal development workshops. He called her death a tragedy. “How could such a beautiful soul with only the desire to help people be shot dead by the police?” he asked.
Here’s our coverage of the incident.
[1:34 p.m.]
Every so often, even the most steeled, line-toeing politicians will have a moment of authenticity crack through carefully crafted rhetoric.
On  the Australian Broadcasting Corporation’s “Insiders” on Sunday, Foreign Minister Julie Bishop was asked how she would react if President Trump told her, as he told the wife of President Emmanuel Macron of France, that she was in “good shape.”
“I’d be taken aback, I think. It’s a rather interesting comment to make,” she said. “I wonder if she could say the same of him.”
Ms. Bishop, as the local news media often likes to remind us, is a keen runner — and her comments suggest she’s clearly familiar with the double standards and sexism that often greet women who occupy power structures dominated by men, who tend to receive far less scrutiny of their physical appearance.
But it was still a break from the norm. As foreign minister, she has consistently made statements supporting Mr. Trump. “We share a common view on many issues, so we will continue to work very closely with the Trump administration,” Ms. Bishop said in January.
Mr. Trump has regularly commented on the appearances of women while president. Last month, speaking on the phone with the new prime minister of Ireland, he interrupted his conversation to remark that a female Irish journalist “has a nice smile on her face.”
His comments about France’s first lady were met with concern and ridicule over the weekend, especially on American late-night television.
“Only Donald Trump,” Jimmy Kimmel said, “would treat a meeting with a world leader like it’s a swingers’ key party or something.”
Mr. Trump has not yet responded to the criticism — or to Ms. Bishop’s retort.
[9:40 a.m.]
