Anchors From Fox and Chinese State TV Hold Live Debate on Trade
BEIJING — Call it the battle of the anchors.
With tensions between China and the United States running high, the fight between the two global powers shifted — at least for 15 minutes — from dry back-room trade negotiations to a buzzier, more high-profile arena: American prime-time television.
After days of sparring on Twitter, Trish Regan, an American television host from the Fox Business Network, and Liu Xin, a Chinese host on China Global Television Network, an international arm of China’s propaganda machine, squared off in a highly-anticipated debate about trade and technology on Wednesday night in the United States (Thursday morning in China).
Presenting a Chinese state media personality side-by-side with a Fox Business Network anchor on live television made for an unusual spectacle. Experts said the event provided the Chinese Communist Party with a rare opportunity to present its narrative directly to American audiences.
The debate got off to an awkward start when Ms. Regan introduced Ms. Liu, speaking over an unstable satellite link from Beijing, as a member of the Chinese Communist Party. Ms. Liu quickly responded.
“Trish, I have to get it straight, I am not a member of the Communist Party of China,” Ms. Liu asserted firmly. “I don’t speak for the Communist Party of China and I’m here today, I’m only speaking for myself as Liu Xin, a journalist working for CGTN.”
For the next 15 minutes, what had been promoted as a lively debate about issues more closely resembled an interview, with Ms. Regan posing questions to Ms. Liu about issues like the continuing trade talks, intellectual property theft and China’s system of state-led capitalism. Ms. Liu, unsurprisingly, stuck close to the party line in her responses, defending China’s economic model and saying that intellectual property theft was an issue for all countries.
Ms. Regan closed the segment on a conciliatory note. “As I told Xin, no one wants a trade war,” she said, “but we have to think long and hard about the right next steps.”
On Thursday morning in China, the debate was the second most popular topic on the Chinese social media platform Sina Weibo. Many Chinese grumbled that the debate seemed more like an interview. Others criticized Ms. Regan for repeatedly interrupting Ms. Liu.
“How can an American-educated professional lack so much basic morality and etiquette?” wrote one user. “Of course she can disagree, but she should do it respectfully. It’s clear that the Americans are unreasonable.”
Ms. Regan, many said, clearly dominated the conversation. Still, experts said that by having a Chinese state media host on her show, Fox provided the Chinese Communist Party with a platform to broadcast its views in America, where Beijing’s efforts to project soft power have had limited success.
“It seemed like the strategy was to show up, be open, showcase yourself and show that China is open,” said Maria Repnikova, assistant professor of global communications at Georgia State University who researches Chinese media. “Seeing someone speaking perfect English and answering questions in an open and eloquent way is already a very different China than most Americans are used to seeing.”
In recent years, the government has spent billions of dollars expanding China’s media presence abroad, part of a broader project to increase Chinese influence overseas.
While CGTN America reaches 30 million households in the United States, the Communist Party-controlled network has struggled to establish itself as a serious media outlet, particularly since it was pressured earlier this year by the Justice Department to register as an agent of foreign influence.
The spat began earlier this month after Ms. Regan argued on her show, “Trish Regan Primetime,” that American tariffs on Chinese goods were a necessary response to the Chinese theft of American intellectual property, which the United States government estimates costs the American economy as much as $600 billion a year.
Ms. Liu, speaking on her show, “The Point With Liu Xin,” accused Ms. Regan of “economic warmongering” and being “all emotion and accusation supported with little substance.”
Ms. Regan responded on Twitter by challenging Ms. Liu to a live debate.
Much to the delight of Chinese back home, Ms. Liu accepted, on one condition: No mudslinging.
News of the upcoming debate went viral in China, where nationalist sentiment has surged amid growing tensions with the United States over a protracted trade war and a fight over Huawei, the Chinese telecommunications giant.
On Sina Weibo, the hashtag “Fox News female anchor proposes debate after being accused by CCTV of being emotional” — using a former name for CGTN — was viewed over 120 million times. Many users posted messages of encouragement for Ms. Liu and praised her for stepping up to defend her country.
“Challenge accepted,” wrote one user on Weibo, calling on Ms. Liu to teach Ms. Regan “how to be a decent human being.”
In the days leading up to the debate, academics and ordinary Chinese rallied around Ms. Liu, gathering data and facts that could be useful in sparring with Ms. Regan.
“Let’s put our heads together, focus on the debate and back her up with specific data and strategies,” Chen Dingding, a professor of international relations from Jinan University in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou, told a WeChat social media group he created to help Ms. Liu in the debate. “Please avoid talking about the issue in general terms.”
On the day before the debate, the group had more than 450 members, mostly scholars and students, as well as Ms. Liu.
Even Chinese officials chimed in to support Ms. Liu.
“I hope everyone can watch,” Lu Kang, a spokesman for China’s Foreign Ministry, said at a regularly scheduled briefing on Tuesday. “You know, in China we have a saying: The truth becomes clearer through debate.”
An English major and accomplished debater from the eastern province of Jiangsu, Ms. Liu was the first Chinese student to win an international public speaking competition in London in 1996. She began working for CCTV after she graduated the following year. According to her official biography, she spent six years as the network’s bureau chief in Geneva, where she covered the Iran nuclear talks and the Syria conflict, before returning to China to start her own show.
Xi Jinping, the Chinese president, in recent years has emphasized the importance of the state news media’s absolute loyalty to the party. He has often cautioned that it needs to “tell China’s story well” by projecting a compelling, party-sanctioned narrative of China’s rise to global audiences.
Some reporters from state media outlets seem to have responded to Mr. Xi’s call with an enthusiasm that borders on nationalistic bullying. Last fall, Kong Linlin, a CGTN reporter in London, was charged with common assault after she heckled a human rights activist and slapped a volunteer at a public talk about the erosion of freedom in the semiautonomous Chinese territory of Hong Kong.
Ultimately, Ms. Liu chose to take a different approach, one likely honed from years of personal experience talking to her husband, a German man of Turkish descent, and their children at home about “China’s story.”
“Because they are greatly influenced by the West, if I tell them, ‘China is this way’ or ‘China is that way,’ then they’ll say, ‘Mom is praising China again,’” Ms. Liu told The Paper, a Chinese online media outlet, in 2017. “After that I learned, O.K., you can’t come on too strong.”
