Talk of Independence? Not in a Public Building, Ex-Hong Kong Leader Says
HONG KONG — A former top official in Hong Kong continued his clash with the city’s Foreign Correspondents’ Club over its plans to host a talk by the head of a pro-independence political party, asking Tuesday why the government should allow the club to lease a publicly owned building.
The dispute could prove a significant test of the limits of free speech in Hong Kong, a former British colony that returned to Chinese sovereignty in 1997. Hong Kong operates as a semiautonomous “special administrative region” under a model of “one country, two systems,” but many residents worry about the deterioration of civil rights under the influence of China’s authoritarian central government.
Leung Chun-ying, who served as Hong Kong’s chief executive from 2012 to 2017, has complained about the club’s decision to host a talk by Andy Chan, the founder of the Hong Kong National Party, which the government is seeking to ban.
Mr. Leung said Tuesday in a Facebook post that he believed the club had a “special deal” with the government on the lease for the building it occupies in downtown Hong Kong, and that other organizations should be able to bid for it.
Carrie Lam, who succeeded Mr. Leung as Hong Kong’s chief executive, said Sunday that the club pays a market rate.
Mr. Leung also called on the club to disclose the terms of its lease, which he said he could not obtain despite having asked several professional firms.
The club, which posts detailed minutes of its meetings on its website, agreed to a seven-year lease of about $70,000 a month starting in January 2016. The rent increased this year to more than $73,000 a month.
In 2008 the club paid a rent of about $37,000, meaning rent has roughly doubled over the past decade.
On Monday the club reiterated its intention to host the Aug. 14 event, called “Hong Kong Nationalism: A Politically Incorrect Guide to Hong Kong Under Chinese Rule.”
“Hosting such events does not mean that we either endorse or oppose the views of our speakers, who have included senior officials of the Chinese, Hong Kong and other governments as well as their opponents, and we will continue to welcome speakers with widely differing points of view in the future,” the group said in a statement.
Mr. Leung argued Tuesday that Hong Kong’s government should not tolerate a tenant with such an open view to speakers.
“They do not rule out inviting secessionists from Taiwan, Tibet and Xinjiang as their guest speakers,” Mr. Leung wrote. “I am not sure how many private landlords in Hong Kong would welcome a tenant who hosts such speakers. Putting it very mildly, why should the Hong Kong SAR Government be any different?”
While Mr. Leung left his Hong Kong post last year, he maintains a national position as a vice chairman of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body to the central government. In a written interview with The South China Morning Post on Monday, he denied that he had been asked by the central government to raise the issue.
“All Chinese citizens should speak out against secessionists,” he said.
