Second Afghan Governor Defies Kabul Order to Resign, Adding to U.S. Headache
KABUL, Afghanistan — A second governor of a northern Afghan province defied an order by the United States-backed central government to step down on Sunday, deepening a political schism between President Ashraf Ghani and regional leaders.
The defiant governors and the Afghan president all oppose the Taliban, but their infighting has added to complications for the United States as it struggles to make headway against the insurgents, even as President Trump has stepped up a bombing campaign against them.
A shift in the United States strategy, toward more bombing and greater pressure on Pakistan, was announced over the summer. But so far, it has done nothing to roll back areas under Taliban control, a report issued on Friday by the Office of Inspector General at the Defense Department showed.
Seventeen years into the war, the Kabul government controls 18 percent of the country’s districts and has influence over an additional 38 percent, the report says.
“U.S. and NATO commanders stated that this revised strategy changed the momentum in Afghanistan,” the report said. “However, one of the few unclassified metrics available to assess this progress, government control of population centers, showed no change.”
The political infighting in the government-controlled area is posing another challenge. In December, Atta Mohammad Noor, the governor of Balkh Province, on the border with Uzbekistan, refused to step down when Mr. Ghani fired him.
Mr. Noor had antagonized the United States military by stopping fuel shipments intended for American-led international forces traveling through the region.
Mr. Noor, a former mujahedeen commander turned businessman who has profited from trade with Central Asian states, said the president had reneged on a deal to offer more government seats to members of his political party, Jamiat-e-Islami, in exchange for stepping down.
Talks to ease him out have stalled, and Mr. Noor has announced that his supporters are planning protests around the country, including in Kabul, the capital, this month.
The political dispute within the Washington-backed government deepened on Sunday when another governor and ally of Mr. Noor in the north, Abdul Karim Khadam, refused an order from Mr. Ghani that he resign as governor of Samangan Province.
“The government’s decision is unjust and unfair,” Mr. Khadam said in a telephone interview, adding that it goes against a power-sharing agreement reached last spring between the Jamiat party and the president.
Mr. Khadam took pains to emphasize that his refusal to obey the order did not amount to an armed rebellion. “Our opposition to the government does not mean we are rebelling,” he said.
Still, the growing standoff spells trouble for the Kabul government. Mr. Noor’s media office said in a statement that he supported the defiance of another governor, and criticized the president.
“Ghani’s recent moves are alarming, and we hope he soon wakes up to the realities on the ground, or else he is taking the country to the edge of collapse,” it said.
In defying the central government, Mr. Noor has aligned himself with ethnic minorities in the north, including the Uzbek warlord Abdul Rashid Dostum, who went into exile in Turkey to avoid possible prosecution over accusations he had ordered his bodyguards to detain and rape a political rival. Mr. Dostum retains the title of vice president.
Mr. Ghani appointed as the new leader of Samangan an associate of a onetime insurgent leader and Taliban ally, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, who reconciled with the government last year. Officials in Mr. Hekmatyar’s party have accused Mr. Noor of receiving backing from Russia, which they say is trying to carve out an area of influence in northern Afghanistan.
Maria Zakharova, a spokeswoman for the Russian Foreign Ministry, issued a statement supportive of Mr. Noor, an ethnic Tajik, saying the central government in Kabul should refrain from “allowing the polarization of Afghan society along ethnic lines, and from violating the rights of national minorities.”
Mr. Khadam, the governor who rejected Mr. Ghani’s order to step down on Sunday, denied any foreign backing for the acts of defiance in the north.
“We will not let anyone interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan,” he said.
