A Top Trump Fund-Raiser Says Qatar Hacked His Email
LONDON — A cyberwar in the Persian Gulf reverberated in the United States this week as a top Republican fund-raiser accused agents for Qatar of hacking into his email to plant damaging articles in the American news media.
The fund-raiser, Elliott Broidy, 60, a national deputy finance chairman of the Republican National Committee, is the owner of a company with hundreds of millions of dollars in contracts to provide services to the United Arab Emirates. Qatar called Mr. Broidy’s charges a false “diversionary tactic to distract from the serious allegations against himself and his client, the United Arab Emirates.”
Mr. Broidy and Qatar each threatened legal actions.
The dispute illustrates how conflicts around the globe can echo through American news media, politics and courts, as rivals compete for the favor of Washington and the sympathies of the West.
Qatar and the United Arab Emirates are both small, conservative, oil-rich monarchies and close American allies, but they have been locked for years in an escalating feud. The U.A.E. has accused Qatar of destabilizing the region by supporting political Islam, and, with Saudi Arabia, the Emiratis have led a monthslong campaign to blockade and isolate Qatar.
Qatar disputes the charges and accuses the United Arab Emirates of bullying its neighbors.
At least three sets of documents that appear to have been hacked from Mr. Broidy’s personal email have been passed in recent days to several journalists at multiple news organizations, including The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, in a coordinated attempt to discredit Mr. Broidy. His allies note that the tactic being used against him resembles a long series of leaks, over more than a year, from the email accounts of the Emirati ambassador to the United States, Yousef al-Otaiba.
Both are vocal critics of Qatar; Al Jazeera, the Qatari-owned news network, has often trumpeted news of the leaks; and allies of Mr. Otaiba have also sought to blame Qatar. But anonymous intermediaries have distributed the leaks, and no definitive evidence of responsibility has emerged.
In a public letter released over the weekend to the Qatari ambassador to Washington, Sheikh Meshal bin Hamad al-Thani, Mr. Broidy accused “registered and unregistered agents” both inside and outside of the United States of carrying out “hostile intelligence operations against United States citizens.”
“Your government’s actions against U.S. citizens will certainly jeopardize your nation’s relationship with the United States at a sensitive and costly political time,” Mr. Broidy added.
In a statement, a spokesman for Qatar denied that it had engaged in or paid for any such crimes, including hacking, and threatened legal action “to protect its reputation.”
In calling Mr. Broidy’s charges an attempted “distraction,” the Qataris were apparently alluding to a Times article that cited leaked documents. It raised questions about the possibility that Mr. Broidy might have sought to profit by selling his influence with the Trump administration to the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Broidy was introduced to the de facto ruler of the U.A.E. by the crown prince’s adviser, George Nader. Last fall, Mr. Broidy sent Mr. Nader a detailed report on extensive advocacy for Emirati goals during a one-on-one meeting in the Oval Office. And Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, has asked witnesses about the possible flow of illegal Emirati campaign contributions to Mr. Trump through Mr. Nader. A spokesman for Mr. Broidy said he had done nothing wrong, and a lawyer for Mr. Nader did not respond to messages.
Both sides of the Persian Gulf dispute have traded allegations of hacking for months. Hackers briefly took control of the website of Qatar’s official news agency last summer, and posted a false account of a speech by the emir that appeared contrived to irk the Arab states and Washington. The emir was quoted as describing “tensions” with President Trump and speculating that he might not last in office, recommending friendship with Iran and praising the Palestinian militants of Hamas. Then the emir attested to his own “good” relations with Israel.
Saudi Arabian and Emirati news networks continued repeating false news of the Qatari emir’s shocking speech long after the emir had publicly denied making it. The two allies began a boycott of Qatar days later. Qatari and American officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, blame the U.A.E. for the hack.
