SYDNEY, Australia — The cattle are more bones than meat, the dirt more dust than soil — and the rain, the glorious rain, just never comes.
The drought that has been suffocating Australia for months just keeps tightening its grip.
In response, state officials in New South Wales announced a new assistance package on Monday worth 500 million Australian dollars, or about $370 million, that will expand existing loan programs and subsidize transportation for shipments of feed and water. The package also includes funding for mental health and critical services like road repair.
But is it enough?
Farmers across the affected region, an area of southeastern Australia larger than Texas that has not seen substantial rain in two years, said they were grateful but certain: It’s not even close.
“I don’t think the government realizes how bad the drought is,” said Rob Aitken, a cattle farmer in Bundarra, New South Wales, the state that has been most severely affected. “Farmers are past the point of subsidies and loans.”
Ambrose Doolan, 53, who has spent decades working the plains near Coonabarabran, said it was now common for farmers to spend tens of thousands of dollars a week or month to feed animals that would normally be grazing free.
He worries most about his son, who has a second child on the way and a farm nearby.
There and on his own land, the damage is inescapable: Cattle that are supposed to be heavy as cars are thin and ropy, making them hard to sell, if not impossible at a decent price.
Farmers these days wake up and go to sleep thinking of both rain and hay.
The aid plan announced Monday aims to help with the latter, setting aside 190 million Australian dollars in “drought transport subsidies,” giving farmers up to half of what they have to pay to bring food and water to their animals.
The program even lets farmers collect retroactively back to January.
Some farmers said they appreciated the effort. Others scoffed at an obvious limitation: The plan supports the transportation of supplies up to 750 kilometers, or 466 miles, roughly the distance between Boston and Washington — or Melbourne and Adelaide.
“I don’t know anywhere we’re going to find hay within 750 kilometers of us,” said Jess Taylor, 36, a mother of four on a farm in Coonabarabran. “I do believe there might be some in Western Australia, but that’s a long way away.”
The last delivery of hay they bought traveled roughly 900 kilometers. Given that, she added, the government’s aid program “is a pretty meager attempt, honestly.”
[Want more Australia coverage and discussion? Sign up for the weekly Australia Letter.]
On her farm, where her husband’s family has been farming for generations, survival is looking increasingly dependent on a more ambitious assistance effort.
Their stock of sheep has fallen to around 75 from 200.
There have been some communal forms of help. Ms. Taylor said that over the past few months they had received a half-dozen bales of hay from an organization called Buy a Bale, which donates it to farmers in need.
“That lasted us two days,” she said.
Her children have already internalized the weather and their parents’ stress.
On his 6th birthday, Ms. Taylor said, her son Harry knew just what to ask for: rain.
“It is the only life they’ve known, I suppose,” she said. “They see us planting seeds. They don’t see them coming up.”
Ms. Taylor said they were trying to remain optimistic. They work and do what they can, eyeing the clouds when they come, feeding the animals they have, cleaning out the containment ponds, or dams, which are normally used to hold water for the family’s flock.
[READ: Australia is a breadbasket to the world. So why are its farmers killing themselves?]
“That’s another thing the government could do,” she added. “We want to set ourselves up for when it does rain again, so grants for us to clean out our dams or build them bigger would be huge.”
Many farmers said the government, at the state and federal levels, should be doing more to ease farmers’ burdens — perhaps by paying for feed and giving it to farmers, rather than expecting them to arrange for it or take out loans they may never be able to repay.
Officials have said they are trying, and would be willing to do more.
Farmers say the time is now.
“I’m worried all the time,” said David Heinjus, 52, who owns about 1,500 sheep on a farm in Temora, a small town in New South Wales.
“People don’t understand how demanding it is,” he added. “The government especially doesn’t.”
