Australia Diary collects reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. Want to share your story, photo, poem or video? Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
The crowd outside in the dust had cheered loudly for me, and now I’m being called and the tent is going crazy. I’m in my corner, about to fight a member of Fred Brophy’s boxing troupe — the last touring boxing tent in the country.
This is my chance to belong to the outback, to the Australian dream of a place beyond where life is tough and a nation was made. 
The corner man tells me to keep my fists up and gives me a little pep talk. He smears my face with Vaseline, pulls on my gloves and then I’m in the ring getting the rules from Mr. Brophy who’s also the referee.
There are to be no body blows, we’re to box around the shoulders, upper chest and head. 
I’m not sure if that’s a good thing or a bad thing.
There’s no headgear in this fight and I don’t have a mouth guard to protect my expensive white teeth.
Me, I’m here to fight the Cracow Mauler. She’s got short sharp hair and the face and attitude of a woman who has lived only among men.
I had seen Fred Brophy’s boxing tent the year before at the Birdsville outback races. The old-school showmanship, the tawdry big top filled with plastic chairs and a raucous crowd willing the violence on as the Marquis of Queensberry rules ceased to apply and fists and feet started to fly — it all had me fixated. 
Back in the city I said I was going to have a fight the following year at the Mt. Isa Rodeo. No one believed me.
Australia remains black and white, divided by race, and when you’re away from the city, your skin color will tell you where you’re welcome or where you can get a cold beer on a hot day. 
You can live in the suburbs and have good thoughts and the best of intentions but it’s not the same in the towns of the outback. Out there are ties that bind, when small towns are flooded by tourists and race matters less than where you are from. 
I learned that lesson in Birdsville seeing Fred Brophy’s Boxing Tent and realizing that here was my chance to belong to the outback, to the rough and tumble, to be part of the margins.
Boxing tents, with their troupes of fighters, have been a part of Australia’s traveling fairs since the gold rush of the late 19th century. Sandy Moore, Jimmy Sharman and others signed up tough men who dug in the dirt to make a living and found their entertainment in fighting a round or two for a pound or two. 
Jimmy Sharman’s troupe had been Aboriginal men — tough, fast and athletic — but the fighters were exploited, and by the 1950s right-thinking citizens had said enough was enough, and white fighters joined the caravan. 
Even Mr. Brophy, with his diverse troupe, are no longer welcome in Australia’s south so you have to travel to remote Queensland if you want to put your gloves on for a prize fight against one of his 12 tough ne’er-do-wells. 
The fighters live rough, sleeping in swags in the dirt and eating meat and potatoes cooked on the campfire that also keeps them warm on the frigid star-filled outback nights.
If you want a fight under the torn dirty canvas, you put your hand up. Man or woman, you’ll be sized up and then called up if you make the cut. If you’ve had too much Four X, Mr. Brophy will send you back down and find another fighter fit to take on someone called Butterbean or Tiny Tim, names at odds with the men who wear them.
The Aboriginal ringers from the outback stations are all primed and ready to go three rounds for a $50 prize, though it’s not about the money. This is where you can get your own back. 
Now here I am. I’ve made the cut. I’ve shaken Fred Brophy’s hand, met the Mauler on the platform and we’re on our way into the tent. I’m listed as the third fight of the night; we’re the only women on the bill.
Mr. Brophy asked me about my boots and I said I’d keep them on. He laughed and I wasn’t sure why.
Me and the Cracow Mauler touch gloves and then it’s game on and first blow I’m down and on the canvas. But I’m right back up again, and now I understand that leather-soled shoes cannot compete when you’re getting hit sweet by a girl who knows how to box. 
I’m flailing and not landing a blow, and there’s coaching coming from the crowd as men shadow box with their fists up as fists are meant to be.
Round 1 is over in three minutes and I’m back in the corner with my man who’s spraying water from a filthy old bottle into my mouth and mopping me down with the dirtiest old towel in Christendom. 
He’s telling me I’m doing O.K., to keep myself protected, keep the gloves close to my face. I’m learning here, but in the next two rounds my lesson gets harder. 
Round 2, and I’m there swinging my arms, not moving my feet, and it’s clear I’ve never had a fight in my life.
The Mauler is landing blows beat by beat, and my cheekbones are burning and my eyes are blurring and it’s all going so fast but so slow, and I want the fight to end but I want it to keep going, but Mr. Brophy blows his whistle and the fight is over. 
I survived three rounds in Mr. Brophy’s boxing tent.
There’s whooping and hollering and, even though I’ve soundly lost, the crowd is on my side.
The Australian outback is tough. Now I know just how tough.
Fred Brophy and his traveling boxing tent continue to tour remote Queensland, despite his threat to retire in 2012. 
