The assault on transgender service members is pure discrimination  A transgender veteran speaks out
   Another day and another attack by the White House against brave and devoted transgender service members. The specter of a ban on transgender people serving openly in the U.S. military is upon us again. Reports indicate that the Trump administration is forwarding guidance to military officials which directs Secretary of Defense James Mattis to implement policy within six months to cease all transgender-related medical treatment and to use standards of "deployability" to filter out transgender service members. Deployability refers to a determination of whether an individual can function in a war zone. 
   As a transgender woman and a Navy Veteran, I join millions who are outraged by this latest action. 
   This is yet another challenge by the White House to deny equality to transgender service men and women. The hypocrisy is startling. This is the same President who stood on a stage earlier this week and when speaking to the country on national TV and in front of a military audience said: 
   "The soldier understands what we as a nation too often forget, that a wound inflicted upon on a single member of our community is a wound inflicted upon us all. When one part of America hurts, we all hurt. And when one citizen suffers an injustice, we all suffer together. Loyalty to our nation demands loyalty to one another. Love for America requires love for all of its people. When we open our hearts to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice, no place for bigotry and no tolerance for hate." 
   Yet in the very same week, we have learned of plans for him to do just the opposite: display prejudice and bigotry towards the transgender community. To deny any man or woman the ability to volunteer to serve their country based on their gender status going forward is ludicrous. 
   If Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden and the U.K. allow us to serve, then why is it an issue here? Because of hateful and willful ignorance by those who don't understand what it really means to be transgender. 
   This must be seen for what it is: blatant discrimination. This will cost the country far more than it could ever potentially save, because replacing just two transgender service members will exceed the cost of medically treating all those currently serving. The Department of Defense-commissioned RAND study estimated the cost of medically treating all transgender service members is between $2 and $8 million. The cost to train just one military pilot alone is well over a million dollars over the course of their career. 
   The average transgender service member has eight years of service and has had two or more deployments, according to SPARTA, an organization comprised of over 600 active duty transgender members, plus additional Veterans and allies. 
   Today transgender service members are currently deployed all around the world in defense of our nation. They serve as commanders, drill sergeants, pilots, submariners, Special Forces, doctors, Marines. Are we to leave it to individual commanders and the chain of command to make recommendations on their continued service? 
   I am confident that the secretary of defense doesn't need this distraction right now, at a time when the military is focusing on a war in Afghanistan, North Korea and while the military is already stretched thin. 
   Before making a casual assumption, people should learn the facts about what it is to be transgender. Don't rely on a perception you may have or a 10-second sound bite. The cost of my medical treatment each year is less than that of a statin drug for cholesterol. 
   So this isn't about cost. This is about ignorance and bias. 
   The President has revealed himself to be a hypocrite who swears he is for equality one day, then allows himself to become the puppet of his vice-president and his anti-LGBT agenda the next. 
   This isn't about party. This is about standing up for what is right. At 48 years old and after transition, I am in better shape than 95% of the country. And my transgender brothers and sisters who want to serve and meet the physical requirements of strength, fitness and speed should be able to serve just like anyone else. To deny them that right is discrimination. It's that simple. 
   Kupec is a board co-chair of Transgender Legal Defense & Education Fund, and previously served as an intelligence officer in a Navy FA-18 Squadron.   
