SYDNEY, Australia — Fiona Patten believes the majority of today’s politicians pretend not to be human. This is why she has no qualms about revealing exactly who she is. Ms. Patten is a politician based in Melbourne and the founder of the Australian Sex Party, which she deregistered this week, while unveiling a new party, named Reason, that she hoped would reach more voters.
She established the Sex Party, which represented one of the electoral regions in the state of Victoria and had 7,500 members, in 2009 after becoming increasingly frustrated with issues such as gender equality, same-sex marriage and government censorship.
“There was this growing frustration that the community was traveling in one direction, and politics was traveling in the other,” said Ms. Patten, who is 53. “So we made the decision that we would take these issues to the ballot box and form the Sex Party, which people thought was mad.”
Despite being a small party with a provocative name, she said, members were able to “punch above our weight” and really get attention because they fought for issues other parties would not touch. Those ranged from establishing a royal commission to investigate child sex abuse in religious institutions to abolishing the prohibition on adult computer games. The first thing Ms. Patten did when she was elected to the Victorian Legislative Council, she said, was to establish an inquiry into end-of-life choices.
Before starting the Sex Party, Ms. Patten and her partner, Robbie Swan, had been running the Eros Association, an industry group representing small businesses in the adult entertainment industry. Before that, she dabbled in what she described as sex work, falling into it rather unusually while working with a health and advocacy group handing out condoms in brothels.
“I went to one place and they were really busy and they had clients waiting,” Ms. Patten said of the brothel. “And they said, oh god, we’ve got this one guy who’s been waiting for ages. So I said, oh, I’ll do it.”
It’s the kind of thing that could bring down a politician, not make one.
Ms. Patten said she became politically active around the time of the AIDS epidemic in Australia, when, she said, she witnessed widespread injustice and discrimination. She remembers that, at that time, there were some “brave” politicians making “brave” policies.
“I witnessed really aggressive and brave politics at that time and I haven’t really seen it replicated again since then,” Ms. Patten said.
From a promotional perspective, wearing T-shirts with the word “sex” emblazoned on them certainly got people’s attention, she said. Ditto having the word on the ballots.
“It got people’s attention so people could look at what we were doing, but some people couldn’t look past the name,” Ms. Patten said. That’s why she established the Reason Party this week – to appeal to a broader audience.
“Because there are so many people disengaged with politics, there are so many people who have been part of the major parties that have just lost faith in them, that is where we’re going to see our growth,” Ms. Patten said. “It’s going to be people steering away from the traditional parties and moving to Reason.”
Ms. Patten said the new party would involve more people and enable her to present workable solutions to issues such as changing the tax code and privacy. Since her announcement this week that she was creating the Reason Party, she said, 250 people have joined up.
“Our ambition with Reason is that it becomes one of the major parties and that Reason has power in Parliament,” Ms. Patten said.
“To take us into federal Parliament and into federal politics we needed to be part of a different vehicle,” she added.
