Prince Harry, Meghan Markle expecting their first child
   Britain’s royal family is getting bigger. 
   Prince Harry and Meghan Markle are expecting their first child together, Kensington Palace announced Monday. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex’s baby is due next spring. The child’s gender was not disclosed. 
   “Their Royal Highnesses have appreciated all of the support they have received from people around the world since their wedding in May and are delighted to be able to share this happy news with the public,” Kensington Palace said in a statement. 
   The announcement comes about six months after Harry’s older brother, Prince William, welcomed his third child with wife Kate Middleton, the duchess of Cambridge. 
   Harry, 34, and the former “Suits” actress, 37, tied the knot in May after announcing their engagement in 2016. 
   Last November, Harry shared his hopes to have kids during an interview with the BBC. 
   "Of course, one step at a time and hopefully we'll start a family in the near future,” he said, as Markle nodded in agreement. 
   Harry and Markle’s first child will fall seventh in line for the British throne, one spot behind Harry. Prince Charles, William and Harry’s father, is currently next in line, followed by William and his three children. William and Harry are sons of the late Princess Diana. 
   British Prime minister Theresa May sent her “warmest congratulations” to the royal couple in a tweet. 
   Markle and Harry arrived in Sydney on Monday. They will spend the next 16 days in Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Tonga as part of their first official tour as a married couple. 
   They did not alter their travel plans but did consider the medical risks of visiting countries like Tonga and Fiji where the Zika virus — which can lead to pregnancy complications — is present, according to reports. 
   It’s been a busy few days for the royal family. Harry’s cousin Princess Eugenie got married to Jack Brooksbank on Friday in a ceremony outside London. 
   Harry and Markle were in attendance.   
