Queensland Becomes Latest Australian State to Decriminalize Abortion
SYDNEY, Australia — State lawmakers in Queensland voted on Wednesday to decriminalize abortion, scrapping a century-old law that had made it an offense punishable with prison time and making it the latest Australian state to loosen its restrictions.
The effort prevailed after activists had tried and failed for decades to gain the traction needed to overturn the law in a state known for entrenched conservatism. This time, the legislation was able to move forward after the leader of the opposition party allowed its members to vote their conscience, rather than follow party guidance. Several of its members voted in favor of the legislation.
It also comes at a time when the Queensland Parliament has achieved a notable level of representation for women: The premier, the head of the government, is a woman, the first in Australia to be elected to two terms. Her deputy is a woman, and so is half of her cabinet. And, in another first, the opposition is also led by a woman.
“History has been made,” Annastacia Palaszczuk, Queensland’s premier, said in a post on Twitter after the vote. “Women will no longer have the fear of committing a crime when making the deeply personal decisions over their own bodies.”
Opponents of the legislation called the development devastating and said they were ready to campaign against members of Parliament who voted for it. “The fight will continue,” one anti-abortion group, Cherish Life, told its supporters after the vote. “The unborn need us more than ever.”
The new law will allow for a pregnancy to be terminated up to 22 weeks, or beyond that with the approval of two doctors. The legislation also creates 150-meter zones around clinics where activists are forbidden from protesting and requires doctors who object to performing abortions to refer patients elsewhere.
It takes the place of a criminal code from 1899 that was based on a British law that was itself overturned some 50 years ago. Though abortion was rarely prosecuted in Queensland, a 19-year-old woman faced criminal charges in 2009 after officials said she used medication smuggled from Ukraine to induce a miscarriage.
Over the past decade, most of Australia’s states and territories have reduced restrictions on abortion. New South Wales, which includes the city of Sydney, is now the only state where abortion remains a criminal offense.
In Queensland, efforts to change the law had failed repeatedly, including an attempt last year that was withdrawn before lawmakers could vote.
Political analysts said one difference this time was that the State Parliament has more women, including in leadership roles. Both major parties are led by women for the first time, with Deb Frecklington becoming leader of the opposition Liberal National Party last year, while Ms. Palaszczuk leads the governing Labor Party.
Ms. Frecklington opposed the legislation but said she supported a conscience vote in keeping with party policy on “matters about the creation and ending of life.”
Some expressed optimism that the elevated role of women would influence the debate on an issue that affects them but which has long been legislated by men.
The debate in Parliament, which stretched over two days, included lawmakers sharing personal experiences. Some spoke of their own miscarriages, and one lawmaker, Ted Sorensen, became emotional as he explained his opposition, saying that he had been adopted and the legislation could have been called the “kill Ted bill.”
“There is a real baby there,” he said. “I was one of them.”
But others argued that women had the right to autonomy over their bodies. Nikki Boyd, a Labor member, called for “much less stigma, judgment and aggression.”
