The Times Talks Over Dinner
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email. Here’s where to find all our Oceania coverage.
______
Underpaid workers. Up and coming arts groups. Innovation. The future of Australia, the wealth of Australia, and the struggle to figure out what it means to be Australian in a more multipolar world.
All of these ideas came up at our dinners with readers this week — and as promised, I figured I’d bring you all a taste of our discussion.
As you can tell, the subjects varied. The dinners in Sydney were small but we covered a lot of ground as my colleagues and I tried to better understand what readers in Australia value most, and would like from us down the track.
We’ll do more of these gatherings in more cities, but here are a few of the questions we asked:
• When you look at The New York Times homescreen or app, what would you like to see less of? What would you like to see more of?
• What is the most memorable story you’ve read in The Times recently — and what made it stand out?
• What are the issues in Australia (or the forms of journalism) you’d like The Times to explore?
• Ultimately, what do you think would persuade more Australians to read The Times and subscribe?
If you have thoughts or answers to any of these questions, shoot us an email at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
Many of the comments that stood out to me during the dinners involved coverage areas and interests.
Our small sample of readers was eager to examine Australian identity: What role the country should play in the world, and what it means to be Australian today.
They wondered how the country has changed after nearly three decades of uninterrupted economic growth. They wondered about the divide between economic winners and losers, between young and old, whites and nonwhites, and why there was less attention to those whose struggles seem to be worsening.
They generally seemed frustrated with Australian politics — no surprise there — but they also pushed us to stay above the partisan divide and continue to deliver coverage with context and perspective.
Many of our readers said they wanted The Times to find more stories no one else would tell, and to propel conversation about hard to discuss subjects, from suicide to class, race, cronyism and gender.
“We don’t like to talk about anything too difficult, but we’re also hungry for it,” one reader said.
[To get the next Australia Letter delivered to your inbox, sign up here.]
There was disagreement on just how much politics coverage they wanted from us. There were friendly, heated arguments about television (“Upper Middle Bogan” has fans and foes) and an interest in seeing us look more closely at covering technology and innovation.
All of these things are on our radar … but what else do we need to know?
If you get the urge, we’d welcome feedback to any of the questions above.
Shoot us an email at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
Thank you to everyone who has helped us grow and evolve so far. More exciting things are on the way.
In the meantime, here’s my weekly roundup of can’t miss stories from here and far beyond.
______
Do you recognize the “flying sculpture,” above? It’s the Skywhale, the giant art balloon that stirred up outrage five years ago when it flew over Canberra.
And it’s back or will be soon. I’m still not sure if I love it or hate it but it does reveal something about Australia and art.
A few other highlights from a busy week:
• Our obituary of Ian Kiernan, the Australian sailor who began an ocean cleanup campaign in Sydney that went global.
• Queensland became the latest state to decriminalize abortion. Could it have to do with the fact that there are so many women in positions of power?
• Harry and Meghan made news with their pregnancy announcement. We step back and  explain Australia’s complicated relationship with the monarchy.
• Jerusalem? Scott Morrison tosses out a possible move for Australia’s embassy in Israel, in a possible effort to win a close Wentworth by-election.
______
A dozen New York Times reporters contributed to this forensic investigation into the suspects accused of killing the Saudi journalist, Jamal Khasshoggi.
Some highlights and analysis from what they found:
• The suspects’ positions in the Saudi government and their links to the crown prince could make it more difficult to absolve him of responsibility.
• The presence of a forensic doctor who specializes in autopsies suggests the operation may have had a lethal intent from the start.
Here’s our editorial on the case; Thomas Friedman trying to explain why he previously wrote optimistically about the Saudi crown prince; and our latest report on audio evidence that Turkish officials are now describing in detail.
______
Canada legalized marijuana on Wednesday, a move that only a few smaller countries (like Uruguay) have tried.
It’s hard to believe that even a Labor or Greens government in Australia would be able to get legalization passed, but if they did seek to explore the idea, we’ve got a handy explainer for them on how it’s set to work in Canada.
______
I still talk about some of the Tom Stoppard plays that I saw years ago (“Arcadia,” for one) and this profile showing just how humble he is, at 81, is worth reading. He has a new play on Broadway. And I’m still in awe of his writing and wit.
For a lighter culture read, don’t miss the magazine’s profile of Melissa McCarthy. It’s Taffy Brodesser-Akner doing her thing again.
And “Milkman,” by Anna Burns, just won the Man Booker Prize. Go buy a copy!
______
A few arguments worth your time.
• What fascism looks like and why these experts think you should be worried about its rise. An Op-Ed video (that works much better than text in this case).
• Sorry geeks, scientists argue, technology isn’t enough to solve climate change. Government needs to intervene.
• What do you do when you’re anonymously accused of rape? Bari Weiss (who will be here in December) explores the case of a man who is suing because he says he has been unjustly accused.
______
Another question we’ve been asking readers is: Who should we team up with?
We’ve partnered with the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, with Carriageworks in Sydney, with the Antidote Festival, and with a handful of other smaller organizations, along with regularly speaking to university students.
But we also recently started some newsletter link sharing with Crikey.
Our morning briefing, Australia edition, now includes some links from their report, brought from behind their paywall; and their Crikey Worm also includes a batch of New York Times links a few times a week.
Here’s where to see and sign-up for Crikey Worm with a dose of Times coverage; and here’s where to sign up for our morning briefing.
Check them both out and tell us what you think.
