Leading Prosecutor for E.U. Anticorruption Job Is Barred From Leaving Romania
BUCHAREST, Romania — A leading candidate to run a new European public prosecutor’s office was barred from leaving her native Romania and accused of several crimes on Friday, a development that is likely to cause consternation in Brussels and raise fresh questions about Romania’s commitment to the rule of law.
Laura Codruta Kovesi, the former head of the country’s anticorruption agency, was questioned for more than six hours on Thursday by the Special Section for the Investigation of Crimes Committed by Magistrates, a controversial agency set up in 2018 with responsibility for investigating prosecutors and judges.
On Friday, the agency announced in a statement that it had started criminal proceedings against Ms. Kovesi, who is accused of bribery, abuse of office and false witness. Placed under a status called judicial control, Ms. Kovesi is unable to leave Romania without the consent of prosecutors for 60 days, and is also barred from carrying out activities as a prosecutor or talking to the news media about the case.
Widely praised in Brussels for her anticorruption record, Ms. Kovesi made powerful enemies at home in her time running Romania’s National Anticorruption Directorate, which successfully prosecuted thousands of government officials, lawmakers and business leaders. Among those convicted was Liviu Dragnea, the leader of Romania’s governing Social Democratic Party, who was sentenced to three and a half years in prison for abuse of office last June. Mr. Dragnea is appealing the verdict.
For many in Romania, Ms. Kovesi is a potent symbol of the country’s continuing fight against corruption. Critics, however, have attacked the agency’s use of court-approved wiretaps under her leadership, and suggested political motives behind some of its cases.
Ms. Kovesi was removed from office last July at the instigation of Tudorel Toader, Romania’s justice minister.
Earlier this month it was announced that Ms. Kovesi was one of two finalists to lead the European Public Prosecutor’s Office, a new agency with a mandate to investigate and prosecute large-scale and cross-border crimes related to the European Union’s budget.
The Romanian government, however, has strongly opposed her candidacy.
Leaving the hearing on Thursday, Ms. Kovesi told waiting reporters, “Probably some people are in such despair that I might get this job that I’m not allowed to speak to the media anymore.”
Contacted on Friday, Ms. Kovesi said that she was unable to discuss the case.
Romania, which currently holds the rotating presidency of the Council of the European Union, has been heavily criticized in recent years as attacking the rule of law. Shortly after parliamentary elections in December 2016, the government began pushing through measures curtailing the independence of the judiciary and weakening anticorruption legislation. This resulted in mass protests, including half a million people taking to the streets in February 2017, the largest in a quarter of a century.
The agency investigating Ms. Kovesi has been criticized over concerns that it could be used to intimidate judges and prosecutors for political reasons.
“While we cannot comment on individual cases, we point out that this is the very section that Greco recommended to abolish,” said Daniel Holtgen, a spokesman at the Council of Europe, using the French acronym for the Council of Europe’s anticorruption body, the Group of States Against Corruption.
In a related development, the Romanian president, Klaus Iohannis, a former leader of the country’s largest opposition party and a vocal supporter of Ms. Kovesi, announced on Thursday that a referendum would be held on May 26, timed to European parliamentary elections, seeking to push back on some of the government’s actions related to the judiciary.
It is unclear how the criminal proceedings will affect Ms. Kovesi’s chances of becoming the European public prosecutor, but several European leaders expressed serious concern at the news.
Antonio Tajani, the president of the European Parliament, said on Twitter on Friday that he was “concerned by news that Laura Codruta Kovesi has been placed under judicial control.” He added that the European Parliament “stands by its candidate for European public prosecutor.”
Manfred Weber, the chairman of the center-right European People’s Party, wrote on Twitter that the situation was “totally unacceptable in Europe and unprecedented for an acting council presidency of the E.U.”
Ms. Kovesi is the European Parliament’s preferred candidate for the job, while the European Council favors Jean-François Bohnert of France. The latest round of negotiations to choose between them ended inconclusively on Wednesday.
