Netanyahu’s Bilingual U.S. Tour  Triumphal and Defensive
UNITED NATIONS — If one snapshot from his swing through Washington and New York this week captured the position in which Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel finds himself, it wasn’t when he sat beside President Trump on Monday and saluted him as a modern-day Cyrus, Balfour and Truman rolled into one.
Or on Tuesday when Mr. Netanyahu reveled in the adulation of 15,000 cheering American Jews as he reeled off a TED Talk-style sales pitch about Israeli economic, diplomatic, intelligence and technological power that could have been delivered to the tune of “Everything Is Awesome.”
No, the precise moment came in an onstage interview Wednesday at the Economic Club of Washington, D.C., when, after fielding a series of easy queries, he was asked a deceptively deferential one: If he could write his own epitaph, how would he want to be remembered?
History will record and debate his answer: “Defender of Israel, liberator of its economy.”
But it may be more revealing, after 12 years as prime minister in which his name became synonymous with his government if not his state, that Mr. Netanyahu was even asked the question.
He is only 68 and healthy. He shows no desire to leave the stage and every intention of breaking David Ben-Gurion’s longevity mark by serving out his term.
Yet there also hovered over Mr. Netanyahu’s trip the vaguely valedictory sense that this outwardly triumphal visit to the United States’ political and media capitals, places where he has grown accustomed to a conquering hero’s reception, could turn out to be his last as prime minister.
The Israeli police have recommended bribery charges against him. Former confidants are lining up to testify against him and his wife. A criminal prosecution seems only a matter of when, not if. And the Israeli media is already treating him like an indicted man walking.
There were the little jokes: Asked if Mr. Trump had given Mr. Netanyahu his bright red tie, the Israeli leader observed, “That could be investigated too, so I won’t answer.”
There were the on-record demurrals, and the off-record defensiveness. After a third former aide agreed to testify against him on Monday, Mr. Netanyahu told his traveling press contingent, off the record: “When there’s something real, then there’s no need for even a single state’s witness. And when there isn’t, even a thousand won’t help.”
It was a snappy comeback, and he took it public in a Facebook video two days later. But it also was a reminder that Mr. Netanyahu, once an architecture major at M.I.T. but never a lawyer, has little experience building criminal cases.
Perhaps the clearest indicator of the dual audiences and agendas of this trip were the differences between Mr. Netanyahu’s remarks in English and Hebrew.
Addressing American audiences in English, Mr. Netanyahu beat the drum, steadily and loudly, for confrontation with Iran, over its ambitions in the Middle East and over a nuclear deal that he implored Mr. Trump to “fully fix or fully nix,” lest Tehran acquire weapons with which it could threaten the entire world.
In English, he whittled his stance on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict down to a blunt end: “The Palestinians should have all the powers to govern themselves, except the powers that threaten us,” he told reporters. “Does that constitute a state or doesn’t it constitute a state? Whatever.”
And in English, Mr. Netanyahu trumpeted Israel’s and, by implication, his achievements: Establishing diplomatic relations and reaching trade deals across the globe, saving the lives of other nations’ innocents through peerless intelligence collection, and using drones and computers to fine-tune agricultural irrigation down to the individual plant.
Speaking to the Israeli news media in Hebrew, by contrast, Mr. Netanyahu played the victim and continued his monthslong assault on the credibility and motives of Israeli law enforcement.
It was just after his Economic Club appearance that he posted the Facebook video, in which he also suggested the police were willing to intimidate witnesses and suborn perjury if it would bring him down.
“They take them into detention, terrify them and tell them: ‘Your life is over, your family’s life is over,’” the prime minister complained in the video. “‘We’ll take everything from you, including your freedom. You want to get out of this? There’s one way — smear Netanyahu. It doesn’t matter if you tell the truth — the main thing is you smear Netanyahu.’”
On Thursday, at the United Nations for a meeting with Ambassador Nikki Haley, Mr. Netanyahu was asked if he wanted to retract that attack. “I can say one thing: We’re being attacked all the time,” he said in Hebrew. “Every hour, every minute. The prime minister is also allowed to insist on justice.”
And he nodded to the polls. “The citizens of Israel, in large numbers — not everyone, but in large numbers — have given their support to me and my wife,” he said. “They want justice.”
Indeed, a brewing political dispute back home threatened to provide an excuse for him to call early elections, a turn that could well result in a public vote of confidence and perhaps enough popular wind at his back to withstand calls for him to resign if he is ultimately indicted.
By the time he wrapped up his visit and headed home, the coalition crisis seemed to be resolving itself, with members of Mr. Netanyahu’s government saying the only way elections would be sped up was if the prime minister insisted on it.
At the same time, the opposition leader, Isaac Herzog of the left-leaning Zionist Union, was floating the idea of a unity government without Mr. Netanyahu as prime minister.
That proposal seemed far-fetched, or at least premature, but there was poignancy to Mr. Netanyahu’s reception in the United States — particularly as he prepared to return home to unkind headlines and a drumbeat not his own.
Asked how he thought Israelis were viewing his trip, Mr. Netanyahu expressed optimism that his statesmanship was getting across.
“I think they see the things that I say, they hear the things that I say, they see the reception that I receive,” he said aboard his El Al jet, before leaving Washington on Wednesday. “I think people have a very strong and clear impression of Israel’s position in the world, in the United States — and my position in the United States, and in the world.”
He said it in English.
