‘Australia? Yes, I Know; Off the Coast of New Zealand’
Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. To receive it in your inbox, sign up here.
______
I may be new to Australia, but The New York Times is not. Our first mention of Australia appeared in print on Jan. 3, 1853, and over the many years that have followed, we’ve published thousands of articles on it — from war reports to book reviews to Op-Eds.
I can’t claim to have read them all, but my abbreviated tour through the TimesMachine archives (an amazing resource for subscribers, hint, hint) brought all kinds of revelations about how Australia sees itself, and the way outsiders tend to approach this country’s history and people.
One clear conclusion: Even early on, The Times seemed to emphasize the links between Australia and the United States, and the fact that Australia tends to get overlooked.
An article from Aug. 6, 1865, for example, begins:
What was that struggle about? Land rights — and a fight between those favored by the British and those who were not. “It was a fierce conquest,” the article said, “between democracy and an oligarchic class.” (Someone might say the same thing today about real estate in Sydney.)
The 20th century brought more coverage of more complicated issues. In 1922, an Op-Ed asked, “Will Australia Stay White?” In 1925, we published a short mention of Australia’s lifting its ban on immigration from Turkey and other countries it had fought in World War I.
And in a generally positive review of a book from 1938 titled “Australia Advances,” our critic seemed to be awe-struck by the author’s efforts to explain Australia, and in awe of the need for Australia to be recognized and lauded.
In case you’re wondering, the headline for this week’s newsletter comes from that book, and a screengrab from part of the review can be found above.
Given the opening paragraph, I couldn’t tell if the critic was making fun of Americans, Australians or all of us together. Still, the review and the book reminded me of the many conversations I’ve had here with Australians admitting that their country still harbors a deep desire for approval from the rest of the world.
Turns out I’m not the only one fascinated by Australia’s mix of breeziness, intelligence and insecurity. Many of my predecessors, while following a more patrician approach to journalism than my own, found and expressed their own particular takes on Australia.
I still don’t know whether to smile or apologize after reading Byron Darnton’s full-page treatise on American soldiers “rubbing elbows with Australia” in 1942. I appreciated his mention of Australia’s wealth and friendliness, and then cringed a bit at his criticism of Australia’s slower pace, leading up to this gem of a 1940s confession: “One American correspondent who dropped considerable weight in crossing the Equator on his way here sent his trousers out to the tailor ten days ago to have the waist cut down, and they have not yet been returned.”
Luckily, more nuanced coverage (and perhaps more mutual respect) became more common as the Australia-United States alliance deepened. From the Cold War on, The Times grew to see itself as a guide for American readers interested in Australia, yielding overviews of what to read to understand this place, earnings reports for mining companies, an examination of the country’s relationship to the queen of England, a spread on a huge power and water project in the Snowy Mountains with contracts for American companies, and a steady stream of travel articles.
What we’re doing here now, of course, is somewhat different. We’re building on what’s come before so that our goal, as I tell anyone who asks, is really to produce journalism that reveals Australia to itself and to the world. If we do this right, we’ll both guide you through our wider report and add to it with journalism about Australia and the region that provides value and insight to your life.
Check out the articles below (some more useful than others, all delightful!) and our recommendation this week — featuring the debut of the NYT Oz Culture Club, which involves free drinks and smart discussion for a few dozen lucky subscribers.
As always, we hope you’ll share this newsletter with friends and tell us what you think at nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
______
Those who pay close attention to China may be amazed by this article by Jane Perlez and Yufan Huang, which brought to life the colossal scale of China’s global infrastructure ambitions and what they mean for small countries like Laos. The headline says it all: “Behind China’s $1 Trillion Plan to Shake Up the Economic Order.”
______
My wife and I just finished watching the second season of Aziz Ansari’s “Master of None,” and it’s just about the freshest, boldest, most heartwarming and surprising stretch of viewing I’ve had in a while. This interview with Aziz reveals what a Renaissance man he really is. And when you’re done watching, skip over to this piece in Vox, which proves I’m not the only superfan.
_______
With the American government retreating from global issues like climate change, lawyers in New York have begun to step up to protect climate scientists who are coming under attack. I’ve heard whispers of something similar in Australia, where renowned climate scientists like John Church have been under attack for a while. Also: Don’t miss our article on the generational divide on climate change that’s playing out in Australia’s National Party this week.
______
Carina Chocano is one of the sharpest cultural critics around (we were kid reporters together in San Francisco), and her essay on the Fyre Festival and “the scam economy” is damning and delightful.
If that’s too dark, you can always applaud Australia’s King Kong going to Broadway, or the opening line of this playful tale: “Political turmoil rocked the nation’s capital again on Tuesday evening as politicians from both parties responded to President Trump’s — you know what, never mind. This is a story about ducks.”
Want to read with us and drink with us, and with Pamela Paul, the New York Times books editor?
Here’s your chance.
Next Wednesday at 5 p.m., Pamela and I will host a conversation with the Melbourne author Sarah Schmidt about her debut novel, “See What I Have Done.” We’ll be in Sydney with some food and drinks for an evening of enlightening conversation on feminism, horror, family dynamics and more.
This is a free and exclusive event for no more than 30 New York Times subscribers. If you’re interested, email nytaustralia@nytimes.com. Put “culture club” in the subject line, tell us why you want to come — and if you get a chance, we’d also love to know the last good book that you read and would like to recommend.
We’ll also livestream the conversation to our private subscriber Facebook group. Here’s how to subscribe and join the group.
