Afghan Vice President Flies to Turkey Amid Torture and Rape Allegations
KABUL, Afghanistan — In the dark of night and amid a criminal investigation into rape accusations against him, Afghanistan’s embattled vice president, Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, left for Turkey on Friday in what Afghan and Western officials suggested could be another long exile for the former warlord.
General Dostum has been fighting for political survival for months after a northern elder claimed he had been abducted from a sports match and then tortured and raped by the vice president and his guards.
After those accusations were made public, the government of President Ashraf Ghani and his Western backers made a strong initial push to get General Dostum to surrender for questioning. Instead, he holed up, and it has become increasingly clear that the government has begun to favor exile as a solution rather than openly moving against the vice president, who is still popular among his northern Uzbek constituency and has threatened violence in the past if he was not respected.
Twice, Mr. Ghani had spoken to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, and a Turkish plane once came to Kabul to pick up General Dostum, but he refused to go, Afghan officials said. On Friday, they said, General Dostum showed no such hesitation, with his eldest son, Batur, playing an important role in persuading his father to leave.
The younger Dostum has been taking a more prominent role in the decision-making of his father’s Junbish party as the vice president has remained under de facto house arrest in his residence in central Kabul.
A statement by General Dostum’s office said he had traveled to Turkey to undergo medical checkups. Reports that his health had been deteriorating were circulating in recent weeks, though no details were provided or confirmed.
“I have remained with my people in difficult circumstances, and I am concerned about the security situation in the country,” General Dostum was quoted as saying. “After completing the medical checkups, I will return to the country in a short while.”
Officials said the airport was under tight security, and General Dostum’s guards drove him to the plane. He was flown out of the country in an air ambulance, but his health was good enough that he boarded without help, two Afghan officials said. Like other officials interviewed about General Dostum, they spoke on the condition of anonymity because of political tensions.
If General Dostum does remain in Turkey, it would not be the first time. In 2008, he stayed in the country for an extended period of time after assaulting another political rival.
Human rights activists have been critical of consecutive governments reaching deals with General Dostum, after decades of accusations against him of war crimes and other brutality.
The allegations against General Dostum come from Ahmad Ishchi, a former governor of the vice president’s home province of Jowzjan. At a game of buzkashi last year, General Dostum was seen publicly yelling at Mr. Ishchi and then having his guards drag the man away. Mr. Ishchi later said that during 10 days in captivity, he had been tortured and then raped by rifle barrels on General Dostum’s orders.
The Afghan attorney general opened an investigation, but General Dostum for months refused to cooperate. Eventually, some of his bodyguards showed up for questioning, but it remains unclear whether General Dostum himself ever answered questions.
During a news conference on Tuesday, the Afghan attorney general, Mohammad Farid Hamidi, said the case remained “under serious investigation.”
