Belgian Soldiers Kill Knife-Wielding Man in Brussels
BRUSSELS — Belgian soldiers fatally shot a man who attacked them with a knife in central Brussels on Friday night, according to the Belgian authorities, who were treating the attack as a terrorist episode.
About the same time, two London police officers suffered minor injuries outside Buckingham Palace when they overpowered a man with a knife.
The Brussels attacker, who was not named, died in a hospital, the Belgian authorities said. Two soldiers were lightly wounded.
On Saturday, the Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack through its news agency, Amaq.
Ester Natus, a spokeswoman for the federal prosecutor, responsible for terrorism investigations in Belgium, said that the man shouted “Allahu akbar” twice during the attack. The prosecutor’s office said it had opened on investigation “on suspicion of attempted terrorist murder.”
The episode occurred about 8:15 p.m. on a street parallel to Boulevard Anspach.
“An isolated individual rushed toward three soldiers who were patrolling in Brussels,” Philippe Close, the mayor of Brussels, told reporters at the scene. “The man was quickly neutralized.”
He said that one soldier sustained minor hand injuries, the other a jaw injury.
Earlier, BX1, a public television station, reported that bystanders said the man had shouted, “Allahu akbar” before being shot. La Dernière Heure, a Brussels newspaper, reported that the man had no known connections to terrorism-related offenses.
In London, two police officers stopped a man on the Mall outside Buckingham Palace a little after 8:30 p.m., according to Scotland Yard. The man had a knife, and the officers suffered minor arm injuries while detaining him, the statement said. The BBC reported that no members of the royal family were believed to be in the palace at the time.
The man was arrested and the officers treated at the scene. His name was not immediately released, and the authorities did not suggest a motive.
Both London and Brussels have been on edge after terrorist assaults in both cities.
