Woman Accused of Murdering Kim Jong-nam Is Freed
SHAH ALAM, Malaysia — An Indonesian woman who was on trial in the 2017 airport killing of Kim Jong-nam, the estranged half brother of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, was freed on Monday after more than two years in custody.
The defendant, Siti Aisyah, 27, will be allowed to leave Malaysia and return to Indonesia after prosecutors in the case withdrew the murder charge against her without explanation.
“I am surprised and very happy,” Ms. Siti told reporters as she left the courthouse.
According to Ms. Siti’s attorney, Gooi Soon Seng, Ms. Siti departed later on Monday for Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, on a private jet with Rusdi Kirana, Indonesia’s ambassador to Malaysia and a co-founder of the Indonesian budget airline Lion Air. They landed in the late afternoon.
The fate of a second suspect in the case, Doan Thi Huang, 30, of Vietnam, remained uncertain. She had been scheduled to begin testifying on Monday for the first time. But after the dismissal of the case against Ms. Siti, the trial was put on hold so that the defense could seek dismissal of the charges against Ms. Doan. The court is scheduled to reconvene on Thursday.
The two women were accused of killing Mr. Kim by smearing VX nerve agent on his face at Kuala Lumpur International Airport as he prepared to leave the country in February 2017.
After their arrest, they said that they were duped into committing the killing and thought they were participating in a harmless prank for a reality television show. Both women potentially faced the death penalty.
Kim Jong-un was widely believed to have ordered the assassination of his elder half brother. At least seven North Korean operatives accused of recruiting the women and setting up the killing left Malaysia without facing charges.
The lead prosecutor, Muhammad Iskandar Ahmad, declined to say why the charge against Ms. Siti had been dropped. He told reporters that the decision had been made by Malaysia’s attorney general, Tommy Thomas.
“There are many reasons, which I think are not proper for me to disclose,” the prosecutor said.
The Indonesian Embassy released a statement saying that the Indonesian government had been working for many months to free Ms. Siti. President Joko Widodo raised the issue personally with Malaysia’s prime minister, Mahathir Mohamad, when the two met in Indonesia in June, the statement said.
“This issue was brought up at every bilateral meeting at every level from the president down to the ministerial level,” the embassy statement said.
Mr. Widodo faces re-election next month and securing Ms. Siti’s release could improve his standing.
Ms. Doan, surrounded by heavily armed guards and wearing a scarf pulled down over her face, was taken back to jail after the hearing.
Her lawyer, Hisyam Teh, said that she was distressed by the decision to free only Ms. Siti and not her, too. “Doan is traumatized that there was no fairness shown to her,” he said.
Mr. Teh said the prosecutor did not discuss the basis for the decision in court.
“We don’t know why the charge was withdrawn,” he said. “No reason was advanced.”
He said he would apply to Mr. Thomas to dismiss the charge against Ms. Doan on the grounds that the two women should be treated equally.
“We hope the attorney general will exercise fairness,” he said. “There must not be justice just for one and not the other.”

After her release, Ms. Siti appeared at a brief news conference at the Indonesian Embassy in nearby Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, where she said she was surprised to have been freed.
She thanked Mr. Joko and other Indonesian and Malaysian officials for her release.
The embassy released an undated letter to Mr. Thomas from Indonesia’s minister of law and human rights, Yasonna H. Laoly, citing grounds for dismissing the case.
He said Ms. Siti believed she was part of a reality show and had no intention to kill Mr. Kim. She was deceived and used by North Korean intelligence, he said, and did not benefit in any way from her actions.
In a separate statement, Mr. Yasonna said that he had also met with Mr. Mahathir last year to plead for Ms. Siti’s freedom.
“Siti Aisyah’s release reflects President Joko Widodo’s commitment to protect and help any Indonesians who face a problem abroad,” he said.
