Vietnamese Woman to Face Trial Alone in Killing of Kim Jong-nam
SHAH ALAM, Malaysia — Malaysian prosecutors on Thursday refused to dismiss the case against a Vietnamese woman accused of assassinating the half brother of North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, just days after her co-defendant was set free with charges dropped.
The Vietnamese woman, Doan Thi Huong, 30, is now the only person facing trial in the killing of Mr. Kim’s brother, Kim Jong-nam, in February 2017 as he prepared to catch a flight from Kuala Lumpur International Airport.
Both defendants were accused of killing Kim Jong-nam by smearing VX nerve agent on his face in the crowded terminal. But they said they thought they were participating in a prank for a reality show and had no intention of killing Mr. Kim. Their lawyers said they were made scapegoats by North Korean agents who, working on Kim Jong-un’s behalf, recruited them and then fled the country.
On Monday, prosecutors dropped the case against Ms. Doan’s Indonesian co-defendant, Siti Aisyah, 27, after intensive lobbying by the Indonesian government, including a personal appeal from President Joko Widodo to Malaysia’s prime minister, Mahathir Mohamad.
Ms. Doan’s lawyer, Hisyam Teh, said on Thursday that he was disappointed that the two women had not received equal treatment.
“It does not speak well of our criminal justice system,” he said after a hearing in the case. “There is discrimination that has favored one party over the other.”
Prosecutors did not explain in court why the cases of the women had been treated differently, and they could not be reached for comment after the hearing. Malaysia’s attorney general, Tommy Thomas, who was personally involved in the decision to drop the murder charge against Ms. Siti, also could not be reached for comment.
The cases against Ms. Doan and Ms. Siti were nearly identical, Mr. Teh pointed out.
The two women said they had not known each other before their arrest and had been recruited separately by men later identified as North Korean agents.
Four North Korean men who the police said were involved in the plot boarded flights and left the country soon after the killing was carried out.
Three other North Korean men who were also believed to be involved took refuge in North Korea’s embassy in Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital. They were later allowed to leave Malaysia in exchange for nine Malaysian diplomats and family members who had been prevented from leaving North Korea.
Kim Jong-un was widely believed to have ordered the killing of his half brother, from whom he was estranged, to eliminate a potential rival.
Ms. Doan had been scheduled to testify this week, but the judge in the case, Azmi Ariffin, agreed with the defense that she was in no shape to take the stand after the events of recent days. He set the next hearing for April 1.
President Joko, who is up for re-election next month, and top officials in his government had long worked behind the scenes for Ms. Siti’s release.
Hours after Ms. Siti was freed on Monday, Indonesia’s ambassador to Malaysia, Rusdi Karana, flew her to Jakarta, the country’s capital, on his private jet. The next day, she met Mr. Joko, who welcomed her home during a well-publicized event and suggested that she not leave the country anytime soon.
“Doan told us she is happy that Siti is back home and she wants the same treatment,” Mr. Teh said.
The Vietnamese government, in contrast, was slow to take up Ms. Doan’s case. On Tuesday, the Vietnamese foreign minister, Pham Binh Minh, called his Malaysian counterpart, Saifuddin Abdullah, to ask for her release.
Mr. Teh said that diplomatic efforts by the Vietnamese government to free Ms. Doan would continue and that he would file another legal application for her release.
He called on Mr. Thomas to explain why the women were being treated differently, noting that the legal reasoning could have a bearing on the defense argument.
The attorney general, he said, “has a moral obligation to explain why they rejected the application.”
“There is no difference in the cases,” he said. “What we want is fairness.”
