Two Speeches, a Decade Apart  How Pompeo Departed From Obama
The speech on Thursday by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo at the American University in Cairo, laying out the Trump administration’s Middle East objectives, was strikingly at odds with a famed speech made by President Barack Obama in the same city nearly a decade ago.
Mr. Pompeo blamed the prior White House administration for “fundamental misunderstandings” that “adversely affected the lives of hundreds of millions of people in Egypt and across the region.”
Mr. Obama’s own speech in 2009 reads a little like an inversion of the Trump administration’s view. Here are some points of comparison:
“I have come here to seek a new beginning between the United States and Muslims around the world,” Mr. Obama said, a theme that became the focus of much of his message to the Middle East. His policy aimed to “acknowledge the past” and work toward shared goals “based on mutual interest and mutual respect.”
Mr. Pompeo criticized the prior administration’s “reluctance to wield our influence” and asserted that under the Obama administration, the United States had been “falsely seeing ourselves as a force for what ails the Middle East.”
Mr. Obama adamantly supported a two-state solution, asserting America’s “unbreakable” bond with Israel while condemning Israeli policies that he said had undermined efforts to resolve one of the world’s most protracted conflicts.
Mr. Pompeo said little about the peace process and made no mention of a two-state solution, stating that the “Trump administration will also continue to press for a real and lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians.” Messages of support for Israel were woven prominently throughout the address.
Mr. Obama opened the door to talks with Iran in 2009, acknowledging “a tumultuous history” and arguing that cooperation with Tehran was in the region’s interests.
Mr. Pompeo focused much of his speech on denouncing Iran, and criticized Mr. Obama’s willingness to negotiate with Iranian leaders.
Mr. Obama did not use the words “terrorism” or “terrorist,” opting for “violent extremists” to describe radical militant groups who carry out attacks in the name of Islam.
Mr. Pompeo called Mr. Obama’s portrayal of these groups “a dire misjudgment” that had helped spread Islamic State militants in Syria and Iraq. He said now, “America has confronted the ugly reality of radical Islamism.”
Mr. Obama tried to walk a line between promoting democracy and supporting authoritarian leaders. He stressed free speech, the rule of law, women’s rights and religious tolerance:
Mr. Pompeo made little mention of democracy and no mention of human rights. He conspicuously avoided criticism of America’s authoritarian allies, most notably Saudi Arabia.
President Obama called Iraq “a war of choice,” acknowledged the American role “in the overthrow of a democratically elected Iranian government” and asserted that colonialism and Cold War politics had denied Muslim-majority nations rights and opportunities.
Mr. Pompeo took the opposite approach:
Mr. Obama quoted the Quran, the Bible and the Talmud, used Arabic phrases and generally wove religion throughout the speech to argue that Islam, like Christianity and Judaism, promotes tolerance and nonviolence:
Mr. Pompeo, an evangelical Christian, began his address with a nod to his faith. He then criticized Mr. Obama for what he called “an eagerness to address only Muslims, not nations” that “ignored the rich diversity of the Middle East, and frayed old bonds.”
One clear point of agreement between Mr. Pompeo and Mr. Obama: a plan to withdraw troops. In 2009, for Mr. Obama, that meant focusing on Iraq and Afghanistan and a transition to supporting local forces.
Mr. Pompeo focused on President Trump’s announcement that American troops would withdraw from Syria, where they have been part of a coalition fighting the Islamic State. He said now was the time for other partners to step in.
