Day 1 of the G20 Summit in Osaka, Japan
Today’s briefing from Osaka has ended. Here’s a closer look at President Trump’s meeting with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir V. Putin.
President Trump voiced optimism on Friday afternoon about upcoming trade talks with China, saying that his planned meeting on Saturday morning with China’s top leader, Xi Jinping, would be productive.
Taking questions during a joint news conference with President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil, Mr. Trump talked repeatedly about the Xi meeting, while avoiding specific predictions. “At a minimum, it will be productive — we’ll see what happens and what comes out of it,” Mr. Trump said.
He denied recent news reports that he had promised not to impose any new tariffs on China in order to arrange his meeting with Mr. Xi on Saturday. “No, I didn’t promise,” he said.
Mr. Trump’s senior aides have just gone through the necessary legal steps for him to impose tariffs of up to 25 percent on $300 billion a year worth of American imports from China. But they have not given any timetable for when he might actually do so. 
Mr. Trump tried to portray the overall trade war as likely to end well. “I think we have a very good chance, we’ll see what happens,” he said.
In the latest sign that China is seeking alternatives to its reliance on exports to the United States as the trade war continues, a Chinese official said on Friday that it hoped to accelerate talks this year on a regional free trade agreement for East Asia, South Asia and the southern Pacific.
Negotiators have made little progress for the past two years on the Beijing-backed agreement, known as the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. Senior Chinese officials had almost completely stopped talking about it by this spring, when it looked as though the United States and China were close to settling their trade dispute.
But Wu Jianghao, the director general of the department of Asian affairs at the Chinese Foreign Ministry, said at a news briefing that China still wanted the deal. “We are continuing talking on this, and we hope we can accelerate the speed so that it can be concluded within this year,” he said.
There are considerable obstacles. India has opposed deep cuts in tariffs, fearing that they would lead to a flood of Chinese imports. And countries in the region do not seem willing to accept the large annual trade deficits in manufactured goods that have made the American market particularly attractive for China. So economists have said that benefits to China from such an agreement might be limited.
President Trump appeared to make light of Russia’s interference in the 2016 election on Friday as he met with President Vladimir V. Putin and, in an almost playful tone, told him not to do it again.
In their first meeting since the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, reported that Russia had mounted a systematic operation to influence the last presidential election on Mr. Trump’s behalf, the two leaders made no mention of that issue or other points of contention between them while news cameras recorded the moment.
Only when a reporter asked Mr. Trump if he would tell Mr. Putin not to meddle in American elections did the president comment.
“Yes, of course I will,” Mr. Trump said.
Turning to Mr. Putin, he said with a slight grin, “Don’t meddle in the election, President.”
Then, pointing at another Russian official in a lighthearted way, he repeated, “Don’t meddle in the election.”
[Once again, the president made clear that he takes the issue less seriously than others do.]
To the surprise of exactly no one, President Trump sneaked a look at the Democratic debate in between meetings with world leaders. And to the surprise of exactly no one, he professed not to be impressed.
Mr. Trump evidently passed a television set just before joining Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany. “All Democrats just raised their hands for giving millions of illegal aliens unlimited healthcare,” he (or perhaps an aide) quickly typed out on his Twitter account. “How about taking care of American Citizens first!? That’s the end of that race!”
He then sat with Ms. Merkel and went ahead with the same criticism of Democrats as reporters were invited in the room. 
“You know they have a debate going on,” he said to Ms. Merkel. “They had the first debate last night. Perhaps you saw it. It wasn’t very exciting, I can tell you that. And they have another one going on. They definitely have plenty of candidates, that’s about it. So I look forward to spending time with you rather than watching.”
Less than 24 hours after tweeting a strong complaint about India’s trade policies, part of a barrage of criticism of American allies, President Trump met with Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India. Mr. Trump began their conversation with congratulations on Mr. Modi’s recent re-election and conciliatory comments about the need for close bilateral relations.
The relationship with India, Mr. Trump said, has not “ever been better than it is right now.” Mr. Modi said the two leaders would be discussing Iran, 5G mobile communications, bilateral relations and defense relations. “We have a position which is farsighted and positive,” Mr. Modi said.
Mr. Trump had tweeted before arriving in Osaka: “I look forward to speaking with Prime Minister Modi about the fact that India, for years having put very high Tariffs against the United States, just recently increased the Tariffs even further. This is unacceptable and the Tariffs must be withdrawn!”
Three weeks ago, Mr. Trump suspended India’s participation in the Generalized System of Preferences, an American program that allows goods from the world’s poorest nations to enter the United States with zero tariffs. India retaliated several days later by imposing tariffs on 28 products imported from the United States, including almonds, apples and walnuts.
One thing world leaders have learned is how to play up to President Trump when he visits. In the latest example, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan at their meeting on Friday gave the president a one-page map and chart — rendered in red, white and blue — showing recent Japanese investments in the United States.
“Japan has FIVE Additional Investments in JUST ONE MONTH,” the sheet declared with Trumpian boldness.
The five investments were all pretty small-bore — $2 million for job training in Michigan and $3 million for 34 new jobs in Alabama, for example. The biggest one was $100 million financing 150 new jobs at a plant in Kentucky.
But the details matter less than the point — Mr. Abe, like other world leaders, has come to understand that the way to appeal to Mr. Trump is to tell him they are spending money in the United States. Mr. Trump thanked Mr. Abe for “sending” auto companies to the United States. “They’re building magnificent plants,” he said.
As the host of the G20 summit, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has lined up a series of bilateral talks with leaders from around the globe, including President Trump, President Xi Jinping of China, Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain and Prime Minister Macky Sall of Senegal.
Conspicuously missing is a meeting between Mr. Abe and Moon Jae-in, the president of South Korea. Given the fact that they are close neighbors, have shared concerns about North Korea and both host American military troops at a time when Mr. Trump has been questioning the need for bases abroad, it would seem the two leaders might have plenty to talk about.
But diplomatic relations between the two countries have frayed considerably of late. The two countries have long tussled over painful historical memories, with South Korea pushing Japan to more fully accept responsibility for occupying Korea and mobilizing Koreans for its war effort. But more recently, the old wounds have been reopened by a series of court decisions in Seoul regarding citizens who were conscripted to work effectively as slave laborers in Japanese factories during World War II.
Japanese government officials have steadfastly declined to answer questions about why the two sides are not meeting at the G20. But in a media briefing Friday morning, Takeshi Osuga, press secretary for the Foreign Ministry, suggested that a meeting could yet take place.
President Trump and Xi Jinping, the top leader of China, both said at a news briefing early Friday afternoon that they wanted to foster the global development of the digital economy, but offered no details on how they might resolve their differences on what that economy might look like.
China has become the world’s dominant manufacturer and exporter of digital surveillance equipment, using it extensively at home and selling it to other countries, particularly in the developing world. Mr. Xi said that the interests of developing countries and industrialized countries would need to be carefully balanced in the digital economy.
“Effective data governance,” he said, “will not only facilitate the collection, analysis, application and flow of data, but also respect the right to self-management of all countries and ensure secure and orderly utilization of data.”
Mr. Trump said that the United States opposed some countries’ requirements that data be held within their borders. Not only China but also countries like India have enacted stringent rules requiring that data from their citizens be stored within their borders, where their security services are readily able to access it.

Reporting was contributed by Michael Crowley, Peter Baker, Keith Bradsher and Motoko Rich from Osaka, Japan, and by Jane Perlez from Beijing.
