SEOUL, South Korea — President Trump said on Sunday morning that he would stage another dramatic encounter with Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, in a last-minute meeting that could serve the interests of both men but is unlikely to bring North Korea closer to Mr. Trump’s goal of denuclearization.
Mr. Trump extended an impromptu invitation to Mr. Kim hours before departing from the Group of 20 summit in Osaka, Japan, offering in a tweet to meet the North Korean leader at the heavily fortified Demilitarized Zone between the two nations “just to shake his hand and say Hello(?)!”
After a day of uncertainty, Mr. Trump announced that Mr. Kim, a dictator whom he describes as a friend, accepted his offer. “I’ll be meeting with Chairman Kim,” Mr. Trump said. “He wanted to do it from the beginning and so did I.”
Mr. Trump was making a long-scheduled trip to South Korea to meet with the country’s president, Moon Jae-in. But it unexpectedly became the latest jaw-dropping installment of his audacious — critics say dangerously naïve — public diplomacy with a North Korean strongman once known for his extreme paranoia and reclusiveness.
It was also clear evidence that the courtship between the two men, which halted abruptly after a February summit in Hanoi at which Trump officials say Mr. Kim proved inflexible, has regained momentum despite concerns among senior Trump administration officials that Mr. Kim is not negotiating in good faith about denuclearization.
Not long ago, tensions seemed to be on the rise again. After the collapse of the talks in February, North Korea issued bellicose statements and conducted a provocative short-range weapons test in May.
But Mr. Trump betrayed no signs of anger. And earlier this month, the mood brightened. Mr. Kim sent Mr. Trump wishes for a happy birthday, to which the American president responded with what he called “a very friendly letter.” North Korea’s official news agency quoted Mr. Kim as saying that the American president’s reply was “excellent content” that showed “extraordinary courage.”
For Mr. Trump, even what promised to be a brief, symbolic meeting with Mr. Kim would play to his love of never-been-done theater. Although the novelty of their interactions has dimmed after two summit meetings over the past 12 months, the DMZ is considered one of the world’s most dangerous border areas.
Resuming dialogue with Mr. Kim would also resurrect a handy story line for the president’s just-launched re-election campaign in which Mr. Trump plays the role of diplomat and peacemaker.
“I said a long time ago that maybe I’ll be a sleeper on foreign policy,” Mr. Trump noted in a Saturday afternoon news conference in Osaka. He later added, “I am really the opposite of a warmonger.”
For his part, Mr. Kim has strong incentives to remain friendly with Mr. Trump. While many experts, and more than one senior Trump administration official, are convinced that he will never willingly give up his nuclear weapons, Mr. Kim can enhance his stature at home and find more legitimacy on the world stage by meeting with Mr. Trump.
Mr. Kim may also be motivated by the American political calendar, which United States officials and analysts say his government analyzes carefully.
“From Kim’s perspective, Trump is still the best possible president to make a deal with, since it is highly unlikely that the next U.S. president would put on the negotiating table big-ticket items that the North has always sought, such as a peace treaty,” said Sue Mi Terry, who served as a National Security Council aide specializing in Korean affairs under both Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama.
But another encounter would bring risks for both men. Mr. Kim was embarrassed by the breakdown of talks in Hanoi after he had taken a train journey of 70 hours to meet with Mr. Trump. He has also said the United States must present “a new calculation” before he would return to formal talks.
But there is no sign that Mr. Trump has softened his negotiating position since he rejected Mr. Kim’s offer in Hanoi to dismantle just one of his country’s many nuclear facilities in return for sanctions relief.
And Mr. Trump himself acknowledged that he had stuck out his neck with his solicitous tweet. In his Saturday news conference, he acknowledged that he knew when he posted his invitation on Twitter that if Mr. Kim didn’t trek the approximately 100 miles from the North Korean capital of Pyongyang to the border, “everyone was going to say, ‘Oh, he got stood up.’”
Even if Mr. Kim does show up, Mr. Trump could face increased pressure to turn the personal rapport into tangible action.
Trump’s latest foray into nuclear diplomacy with Mr. Kim comes just after the first anniversary of their initial summit meeting, last June in Singapore, where Mr. Kim made a vague commitment to denuclearization under an unspecified timeline.
Since then, Mr. Kim has halted nuclear weapons tests and the long-range ballistic missile tests that once had Mr. Trump contemplating military action. Yet North Korea in that time has produced enough uranium and plutonium to fuel a half-dozen new nuclear warheads, according to intelligence estimates.
“A DMZ rendezvous makes a good photo op but comes with no real denuclearization, and legitimizes a human rights abuser,” said Victor Cha, a former director for Asian affairs on George W. Bush’s National Security Council. “If there is no meeting, then Trump raised expectations such that this becomes a setback to the diplomacy.”
Skeptics of diplomacy with Mr. Kim’s regime include Mr. Trump’s own national security adviser, John Bolton, but Mr. Trump has recently said that he has to “temper” Mr. Bolton’s hawkish instincts.
Mr. Trump’s outreach also comes after a period in which his special envoy for North Korea, Stephen Biegun, has had little success engaging North Korean diplomats. Mr. Biegun arrived in South Korea late this week, but had not been expected to talk to any North Korean officials.
“The Kim-Trump relationship has become not a lubricant of diplomacy but an impediment to it because Kim refuses to deal with U.S. officials below Trump’s level,” Ms. Terry said.
The outreach to Mr. Kim was enthusiastically welcomed by Mr. Trump’s host here, Mr. Moon, who has worked hard to promote dialogue with the North. Mr. Moon said he would join Mr. Trump on his expected visit to the Demilitarized Zone on Sunday afternoon. The South Korean leader himself greeted Mr. Kim along the DMZ border last year, an event that thrilled many in his country, where there are hopes for a peaceful reunification of North and South.
In remarks before a meeting with Mr. Trump on Saturday, Mr. Moon said that Mr. Trump’s invitation to his North Korean counterpart made him “feel that the flower of peace is truly blossoming on the Korean Peninsula.”
He added that even if Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim were to have only a brief meeting, “I believe that that picture in itself would represent an historic event,” and “a significant milestone in terms of the peace process on the Korean Peninsula.”
A meeting with Mr. Kim would expand the list of encounters Mr. Trump has had with foreign strongmen over the past few days. At the G20 summit in Osaka, Mr. Trump had notably friendly interactions with the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammed bin Salman, President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil, and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
Political considerations aside, an advance-notice DMZ greeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim could test the nerves of even the steeliest Secret Service agents.
When Mr. Trump planned a trip to the DMZ during a 2017 visit to Seoul, his aides went to great lengths to keep the excursion secret. It was not included on his official schedule, and the White House press secretary, Sarah Sanders, notified the reporters traveling with Mr. Trump of the plan shortly before their planned departure by holding up a piece of paper with the letters “DMZ” scrawled on it. Ms. Sanders said she had been instructed not to utter the sensitive destination aloud.
Ultimately, thick fog forced Mr. Trump’s helicopter to turn back around.
