In Crimea, Russian Land Grab Feeds Cries of ‘Carpetbaggers!’
SEVASTOPOL, Crimea — More than three years after Russia snatched Crimea from Ukraine, the peninsula is suffering through an extended season of discontent.
Shady, Kremlin-appointed bureaucrats are proving to be just as corrupt and inept as their Ukrainian predecessors. International sanctions, shrugged off in the heady days after the Russian annexation, have jacked up food prices while endlessly complicating ordinary aspects of life, like banking and travel.
Perhaps most galling to Crimeans, the government is hauling thousands of residents into court to confiscate small land holdings distributed free as a campaign ploy in 2010 when Ukraine controlled the Black Sea peninsula.
Residents of Sevastopol, famous as a historic battleground and home to the Black Sea fleet, were among the most vocal, militant supporters of Russia when it annexed Crimea.
That was then.
“I supported reunification because I thought that with Russia’s arrival things would improve,” said Lenur A. Usmanov, a rare outspoken Kremlin partisan from the Tatar minority who has since become a serial protester. “But there is no change.”
Yevgeny V. Dzhemal, an activist lawyer fighting the mass land expropriation, put it even more succinctly: “They were bastards under Ukraine, too. Nothing has changed.”
The United Nations issued a report this week accusing Russian security agencies of committing “grave” human rights abuses since the annexation. Many of those abuses occurred right after the annexation against those who resisted the takeover. Russia dismissed the report as “absurd” inventions spread by its opponents.
Locals largely focus on different complaints. They invariably denigrate the new bureaucrats as carpetbaggers, using the word “varyagi” in Russian, an old word for Viking outsiders, especially when it comes to land confiscation.
The city of Sevastopol claims that it must repossess at least 10,000 plots to help create a rational development plan. The owners howl that the “mass land grab” will benefit crooked developers and senior officials who covet what when stitched together amounts to sprawling tracts of choice seaside property.
“Nobody thought it would be as bad, with issues emerging suddenly like the land plots,” said Roman Kiyashko, the burly Communist Party candidate for governor whose campaign slogan, “Your man from Sevastopol,” emphasized his native roots. “Russian officials act like an elephant in a china shop. They just implement their policies with no feedback.”
Yet many natives stress that the
