Airlines Divert Flights Around Iran After U.S. Drone Is Shot Down
Several international airlines were diverting planes from flying over the Strait of Hormuz and parts of Iran on Friday, a day after the Iranian military shot down an American surveillance drone and the United States went to the brink of launching a retaliatory strike.
The Federal Aviation Administration issued an emergency order early Friday that prohibited all American flights in Tehran-controlled airspace above the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman because of “heightened military activities and increased political tensions.”
The agency said that flight operations in the area were prohibited “until further notice.”
United Airlines said in a statement that after a security assessment, it had suspended flights between Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey and Mumbai, India, that typically fly through Iranian airspace.
The German airline Lufthansa said in an emailed statement that its planes would not fly over the Strait of Hormuz and that the diversion area was likely to expand.
[Follow live updates about the escalating tensions between Iran and the U.S.]
The Dutch airline KLM has also diverted flights as a precautionary measure because of the “incident with the drone,” it said in an emailed statement. Qantas Airlines of Australia said in a statement that it would be rerouting flights to avoid the Strait of Hormuz and the Gulf of Oman, which would affect its flights to and from London. British Airways said it was taking similar measures.
On Thursday, President Trump approved military strikes against Iran in retaliation for the downing of the drone, but then abruptly pulled back from launching them.
Officials said President Trump had initially approved strikes on targets that included radar and missile batteries before walking back the decision.
United States officials maintain that the drone — an RQ-4 Global Hawk — was flying in international airspace when it was struck by Iran. Iranian officials said the aircraft had flown into Iranian territory when it was shot down in Hormozgan Province, along the country’s southern coast.
Iranian officials have insisted that the actions were a defensive move. The foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, tweeted what he said were the exact coordinates of where the drone was targeted “near Kouh-e Mobarak,” within Iranian airspace.
The Iranian military later released video to state-run news outlets that it said showed the moment its missile defense system shot down the American drone.
In the clip, a missile can be seen being fired from the Khordad 3 air defense system of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, and a few seconds later, an explosion can be seen in the sky.
Later, the state-run broadcaster released images that it said showed pieces of the downed drone.
Iran summoned the Swiss ambassador, Markus Leitner, to a meeting at the Foreign Ministry in Tehran on Friday, according to the semiofficial Mehr News outlet. Switzerland represents United States interests in Iran as there is no American Embassy in the country.
In an emergency call Thursday night, the deputy foreign minister of Iran, Abbas Araghchi, told the Swiss ambassador that there was “indisputable” evidence that the American drone had violated Iran’s airspace, according to the news report.
Diplomats from other nations have been urging calm.
Sergei Ryabkov, Russia’s deputy foreign minister, told Russian news outlet TASS called the situation “a balancing act on the edge of war.”
“It is absolutely evident from the incoming information that the situation is extremely dangerous,” he said. “The menace of a conflict is not gone, and we once again are calling on responsible parties, if any are still left in Washington, to weigh all the consequences. We warn against incautious steps.”
