Saudi King, in Russia, Seeks Warmer Ties With a Longtime Foe
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia warmly welcomed King Salman of Saudi Arabia under the gleaming chandeliers of the Kremlin on Thursday, signaling a rapprochement between two longtime rivals who have faced off in some of the world’s thorniest conflicts.
King Salman’s visit, the first by a Saudi monarch, sought to cement growing ties between the world’s two largest oil producers, which have coordinated efforts to stabilize crude prices, lift their economies and end the war in Syria.
The visit highlights efforts by King Salman, since he ascended the throne in 2015, to shift away from his country’s historical reliance on the United States and diversify its international partnerships, analysts said.
The visit also acknowledges Russia’s increasing clout in the Middle East, and the kingdom’s tacit acceptance of the enduring rule of President Bashar al-Assad in Syria, whom Saudi Arabia had opposed and Russia had intervened to save.
“We cannot ignore that Russia has become a key player in the Middle East, particularly due to the Obama doctrine that saw the U.S. role in the region shrink,” said Faisal J. Abbas, editor in chief of Saudi Arabia’s Arab News, who was in Moscow for the visit. “Russia, with its financial and military might, stepped into the equation.”
The recalibration of the kingdom’s foreign relations comes as it ushers in domestic reforms that could alter its socially conservative society. King Salman, 81, removed the power of arrest from the country’s religious police, and announced last week that the ban on women driving would be lifted. Other changes, such as repealing the ban on cinemas, are expected soon.
For more than half a century, Saudi Arabia has looked to the United States as its most important ally, working closely with successive administrations on economic, political and security issues across the Middle East.
For much of that time, Saudi Arabia remained hostile to the Soviet Union, backing Islam as antidote to communism and contributing to far-flung Cold War insurgencies.
In the 1980s, it partnered with the Central Intelligence 
