SEE IT  Jim Harbaugh gives Pope Francis a Michigan football helmet, Jordan sneakers 
   Maybe Jim Harbaugh considers this a preseason Hail Mary. 
   The Michigan coach gave Pope Francis a Wolverines football helmet and some Jordan sneakers Wednesday during the team's week-long trip to Rome. 
   "He looked at the helmet and he took the pair of Jordan sneakers, it was a box, helmet on top, and he took it and he smiled and nodded his head and then gave it to somebody next to him," Harbaugh told the Detroit News. "I'm not sure the Holy Father knows a lot about football Americano, but he doesn't need to." 
   And hey, it can't hurt for Harbaugh, a devout Catholic, to try to impress the pope ahead of next season. 
   "The experience was emotional, it was beautiful," said Harbaugh, who added that he and his wife, Sarah, prayed with him. "The Holy Father's face is beautiful. His smile. The way he talks is peaceful. It's calm. It felt like this is what it would be like to meet Jesus Christ. That's what it felt like to me. Very emotional." 
   Most of the team was in the general audience with the pope at St. Peter's Square in Vatican City. Ahead of the trip, which is being funded by a private donor who has requested anonymity, a number of players wrote essays about what it would meant to meet the pope. 
   "The Pope is the closest mortal being to God," offensive lineman Grant Newsome wrote ahead of the trip, "so by shaking the Pope's hand and by telling him 'thank you,' I feel that I could truly show God how appreciative I am of him." 
   Defensive tackle Salim Makki, who describes himself as a devout Muslim, said in an essay that Pope Francis is one of his heroes. 
   "In a time where Muslims have been scrutinized and wrongly identified with violence, Pope Francis has defended Islam and stated that not all Muslims are violent," he wrote. 
   Harbaugh, who considers the trip to be educational but also for team-bonding, said he also wants to take his teams to Japan, Israel, South African and either England or New Zealand in the future. 
   — with News Wire Services   
