A Surfer Is Killed, and Australia Asks  Do More Sharks Need to Die?
SYDNEY, Australia — The state wants to subsidize surfers who buy electromagnetic devices to repel sharks. Other voices insist on deploying nets or hooks to catch and kill them. One hunter has proposed dispatching a rapid-response team on helicopters to “just shoot the shark in the head.”
The death last week of Laeticia Brouwer, a 17-year-old surfer, in a shark attack off Australia’s southern coast has renewed debate in the country over what, if anything, should be done to protect people who venture offshore in a place mad for watersports. Fourteen people have been killed by sharks nationwide since the start of 2012.
Last week, the federal environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, accused Western Australia, the state where the last three fatal attacks occurred, of failing to respond to the problem. “The commonwealth would welcome any proposal to protect human life first and foremost,” he said, suggesting culling or other measures as the state saw fit.
Vic Hislop, a former shark hunter from Queensland, called for the helicopter strike teams in an interview with News.com.au, warning, “As they continue to let the sharks escape after they eat somebody, it’s going to get worse and worse. Make no mistake.”
But Western Australia denies that killing sharks would be productive. Last week, the state fisheries minister, Dave Kelly, said that culling did not “actually make our beaches any safer.” And its premier, Mark McGowan, said people would always face a very small risk of being attacked in the ocean, calling it a “harsh reality.”
Culling is controversial because many shark species are endangered: Perhaps 100 million sharks are killed every year, often for their fins. Hunting of vulnerable types, including the great white shark, is prohibited, yet states can seek exemptions if they think attacks are threatening people or tourism revenue.
In 2014, Western Australia used baited drum lines — hooks suspended between a float and the ocean floor — to trap sharks after a series of attacks. Sixty-eight of them, all measuring more than 10 feet, were shot before the policy was revoked over ecological concerns. In Queensland, where drum lines have been used for decades, scientists say that there is 
