Police Raids Targeting Moscow Director Set Off Fears of a Crackdown
MOSCOW — Many of Russia’s leading cultural figures were up in arms on Wednesday after investigators raided an acclaimed theater in Moscow and took its renowned artistic director in for questioning as part of a corruption investigation.
The director, Kirill S. Serebrennikov, leads the Gogol Center, the focal point of the recent artistic reawakening in the Russian capital.
Raids at the Gogol Center and Mr. Serebrennikov’s apartment took place on Tuesday, and he was released late that night after hours of questioning in connection with an investigation of a multimillion-dollar embezzlement scheme.
Actors who were rehearsing in the theater at the time of the raid there had to give up their phones and stay in the building for hours until the search was completed.
In a statement, the investigators said that several undisclosed individuals had stolen $3.5 million in state funds that from 2011 to 2014 had been awarded to Studio Seven, a theater production company that Mr. Serebrennikov led at the time. The studio’s former administrative director and accountant were detained on Wednesday.
In a country where everything is seen as controlled by the Kremlin, the developments caused leading cultural figures to rally around Mr. Serebrennikov, who feared the raids might signal a crackdown on artistic freedom.
Many artists and theater and film directors voiced their support of him in letters to President Vladimir V. Putin.
“He is an artist, someone who is not, in my opinion, responsible for the financial sphere,” said Vladimir G. Urin, the director of the famed Bolshoi Theater, one of those who wrote a letter to Mr. Putin. He said what happened to Mr. Serebrennikov was “wrong,” the Interfax news agency reported.
During a ceremony at the Kremlin on Wednesday, a renowned Russian actor, Yevgeny V. Mironov, passed a letter to Mr. Putin as the president pinned a state award to his jacket.
Mr. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, denied that the Kremlin had been involved in the raids. “In this case I can say only one thing: Only a court can accuse anybody of anything,” he said.
Mr. Serebrennikov has staged many theater productions that explore Russia’s current political life, including the plight of people who find themselves on the fringes of society. Conservative activists and commentators in Russia have often criticized his work.
His latest film, “The Student,” depicting the hypocrisy of religion, won a special prize at the Cannes Film Festival last year.
