European Leaders Hope to Win Trump’s Favor
LONDON — Brussels, which he called a “hellhole,” and the European Union, which he called “a vehicle for Germany,” and NATO, which he called “obsolete,” are all nervously awaiting the arrival of President Trump on Wednesday, the way earthlings might await the impact of an asteroid.
Security will be very tight, especially after the terrorist attack Monday night in Manchester, England, with police officers brought in from all over Belgium and some neighboring countries.
But anxiety is already high and expectations are low for a two-day visit studded with deliberately brief meetings and only modest substance. For Mr. Trump, in the middle of a grueling nine-day trip, this is a chance to meet and greet about 30 European leaders with not too much heavy lifting. For the Europeans, it is an opportunity to try to get Mr. Trump to understand more fully the importance of the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in keeping the peace.
What they hope for is praise and support from Mr. Trump, who has aligned himself more with the critics of the European Union, like the Brexit supporters in Britain and even Marine Le Pen in France, especially as he meets the young pro-European French president who defeated her soundly, Emmanuel Macron.
NATO hopes, in particular, for a public declaration from the president that he endorses the alliance’s Article 5, its commitment to collective defense. While Mr. Trump has said he no longer considers NATO obsolete, because it has supposedly moved to reform itself in response to his criticisms, he has never endorsed Article 5. Instead, he has spoken of the American commitment to the alliance as transactional, depending on whether member states “pay their bills.”
When Mr. Trump was running his extraordinary campaign for the presidency, the European Union was in a more urgent crisis, with the British voting to leave the bloc and anti-European Union parties making inroads in countries like France, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy and Spain.
But Europe seems to be emerging from its crisis, though problems persist, while it is Mr. Trump who seems to be at risk. He is facing serious challenges at home from the fallout of his campaign’s reported connections to Moscow and his firing of the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, who was heading the Russia investigation.
“The bar for success at this meeting, which NATO is not even bothering to call a summit, is incredibly low,” said Derek Chollet, a for
