Russia Vetoes Stopgap Resolution to Preserve Syria Chemical Weapons Panel
Russia used its veto power Friday to block a stopgap measure at the United Nations Security Council that would have temporarily preserved the panel investigating who is using chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict.
It was the second Russian veto in 24 hours aimed at ending the panel, which has found since its creation by the Security Council two years ago that both the Syrian government and Islamic State militants have used chemical weapons in the conflict, a war crime.
The panel, known as the Joint Investigative Mechanism or J.I.M., needed reauthorization from the Security Council by Friday to continue its work.
Russia, the Syrian government’s most important ally, has now used its veto 11 times to shield the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria since the war that has convulsed that country began in 2011.
“In a world in which the council’s time and attention could be productively devoted to 100 different things, Russia is wasting our time,” Ambassador Nikki R. Haley of the United States said after Russia’s latest veto was cast. Ms. Haley said “Russia can obstruct this council but it can’t obstruct the truth.”
Ambassador Vassily A. Nebenzia of Russia rejected the criticism, reiterating Russia’s view that the chemical weapons panel had become a tool of Western powers to defame Mr. Assad and had “disgraced itself” with shoddy work and false conclusions.
In acidic language reminiscent of the Cold War, Mr. Nebenzia said Western attempts to cast Russia as the villain was “nothing but deliberate misinformation,” and that “what is taking place here is akin to a bad theater production.”
The Russian veto on Friday thwarted a compromise resolution offered by Japan to preserve the panel for 30 days while diplomats worked on a longer-term solution that all council members could agree upon.
The panel’s demise makes it unclear, at best, whether chemical weapons users in Syria will ever be held accountable.
The Japanese compromise resolution collapsed a day after rival Security Council resolutions offered by the United States and Russia for a one-year extension of the panel ended in acrimonious failure.
Russia vetoed the American resolution, which would have left the panel’s structure unchanged. The Russian resolution, which the Americans and their allies said would have neutered the panel’s investigating powers, garnered only four votes. At least nine are needed for passage in the 15-member council.
The Japanese compromise received 12 votes. Besides Russia, Bolivia also opposed it and China abstained.
France’s ambassador, François Delattre, said he was “stunned” by Russia’s response.
“Let us be clear: we respect and we will always continue to respect Russia,” he said. “However this amassing of vetoes gives rise to numerous questions.”
Mr. Delattre said “today’s vote is disastrous, it cannot be the final word.”
Russia has aggressively objected to the investigating panel’s last report, on Oct. 27, which found Syria forces were responsible for the April 4 sarin attack on the rebel-held village of Khan Sheikhoun.
The Russians said that the panel’s investigation was “nonsense,” and that renewal of its mandate would require improved methods of establishing culpability for chemical weapons attacks.
