The Paris Attacks, 2 Years Later  Quiet Remembrance and Lasting Impact
PARIS — France paid homage on Monday to the victims of the coordinated terrorist attacks in and around Paris two years ago that left 130 dead and more than 600 wounded, a national trauma that reshaped the country’s balance between security and civil liberties.
Under tight police protection, President Emmanuel Macron and former President François Hollande, who was in office at the time of the attacks, traversed the route taken by the attackers on the balmy Friday evening of Nov. 13, 2015.
Then at each of the six attack sites, officials placed a wreath, observed a minute of silence and listened to a reading of the names of the victims.
The locations included a bombing at the Stade de France arena; shootings at restaurants in the 10th and 11th arrondissements; and a siege of the Bataclan concert hall where the band the Eagles of Death Metal was playing.
The band returned on Monday morning to play at the Bataclan in front of officials and mourners.
Mr. Macron, who usually embraces an opportunity to give a speech, said nothing publicly during the services, opting instead to share only his private condolences with the families of those who died and had come to pay their respects.
Despite television coverage of the ceremonies, some felt that too few Parisians took part in the observances. Although 200 people gathered close to the Bataclan to watch the ceremony, at the other sites, fewer people came.
But while the sharpest memories of the attacks may be receding for some, much daily life in Paris remains marked by reminders of the threat of terrorism.
Many of the attackers had traveled to Syria or Iraq before returning to France, where they and others presented an essentially homegrown security threat, however manipulated or inspired from abroad.
The Interior Ministry still describes the threat of terrorist attacks as extremely high, and police patrols in Paris are far more routine than before. Tourist attractions are guarded by heavily armed officers, and 7,000 soldiers have been deployed across France to sites the government believes may be targets for attack.
Even so, the attempted attacks have shown no sign of abating. So far this year, 13 attacks have been stopped, according to Interior Minister Gérard Collomb, including one that involved conspirators in France and Switzerland.
Despite those successes, three people have been killed by terrorists in France in 2017: two civilians in Marseille and one police officer on the Champs-Élysées.
The attempted attacks have gone on despite a two-year state of emergency that gave the police extraordinary powers to detain people even if there was not enough evidence to charge them.
The state of emergency ended on Nov. 1, but only after the National Assembly approved legislation in October that enshrined many of its provisions into law.
In 2016, the French Parliament approved another sweeping law that allows the police and prosecutors to use electronic eavesdropping technology previously limited to the intelligence services, including hidden cameras and access to electronic data.
In an interview this past weekend with The Journal du Dimanche, Mr. Collomb, the interior minister, said that France was better armed today to counter terrorists than it had been in 2015.
But, he said, the threat had changed from a large network closely directed by the Islamic State to “little groups here and there in our country, who have plans to carry out violence but do not have links with each other.”
