Fight Over Control of a Cathedral Shows St. Petersburg’s Contrarian Side
ST. PETERSBURG, Russia — On a dank and misty winter afternoon, more than 2,000 people marched to protest the transfer of control of St. Isaac’s, the main cathedral of this grand imperial city, into the hands of the Russian Orthodox Church.
Today, St. Isaac’s — one of the biggest churches in the world, whose golden dome towers over a city founded by Peter the Great as a rival to Paris and Rome — is managed by a museum, set up by the Soviet government in 1928. Before the revolution moved the capital to Moscow — widely regarded here as an uncultured city of sly merchants — an imperial ministry had administered the cathedral.
Sliding through the typical St. Petersburg slush that January day, the protesters, most of them members of the local intelligentsia, made clear their determination to have their demands heard.
Wearing blue ribbons — the symbol of a movement to preserve St. Petersburg’s admired skyline, still dominated by elegant spires, as opposed to Moscow’s showy skyscrapers — they shouted: “We have defended this city against the fascists, so we will do against these!”
The protest was organized by a few local lawmakers who were outraged that St. Petersburg’s governor, Georgi S. Poltavchenko, had decided the fate of one of the city’s symbols without any discussion, just saying bluntly about the transfer that “the issue has been resolved.”
“I think there are enough churches already,” said Natalya Belousova, one of the protesters, a retired engineer. “I love St. Isaac’s very much, but this is a monument first and a church second.”
The transfer will take about two years, according to the current plan announced by the government. The museum will first have to document all the cultural monuments inside the cathedral before it can vacate the building.
In recent years, the Orthodox Church has assumed an outsize role in Russia’s political life and steadily increased its influence over worldly matters, from getting opera productions banned and censoring film scripts to turning a blind eye to radical Orthodox activists, who smash what they see as antireligious sculptures.
“The problem is that Orthodox believers receive preferential treatment,” said Galina Bova, a Russian-language teacher who was at the protest. “But what about nonbelievers, or those who belong to other confessions?”
The influence of the church has grown to the extent that some of the Kremlin’s allies evidently felt confident enough to use anti-Semitic vocabulary to describe the people protesting against the transfer.
Those marching “are the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of those who destroyed our churches, who jumped out of the Pale of Settlement with revolvers in 1917,” said Pyotr Tolstoy, the deputy speaker of the Duma, the lower house of Russia’s Parliament, and a descendant of Leo Tolstoy.
He was referring to the only Russian region where Jews were allowed to live during imperial rule. The comment provoked widespread outrage, forcing Mr. Tolstoy to apologize.
In many Russian cities people have welcomed the church’s increased clout, but not in St. Petersburg, a city always known for its contrarian stance. The local Parliament is one of the few in which anti-Kremlin forces have a significant voice. And unlike Moscow, which was known as a city of “forty forties” of churches, or 1,600 of them, St. Petersburg was always a symbol of a strong and enlightened state with the church subordinate to it.
“St. Petersburg is a city where people go out to the streets only because of monuments,” said Mikhail B. Piotrovsky, the head of the State Hermitage Museum, one of the largest in the world, with works by Leonardo da Vinci and Titian. “People fight for the dignity of their city.”
Mr. Piotrovsky sent a letter to Patriarch Kirill, the head of the Russian Orthodox Church, asking him to suspend his request to transfer control of the cathedral. He warned that if St. Isaac’s were turned into a simple parish church, this would make St. Petersburg more provincial, a threat that is seen as existential to any proudly cosmopolitan Petersburger.
Anger over the transfer is also tied to St. Petersburg’s second-city rivalry with Russia’s capital and the seat of the patriarch. There is a widespread idea that it isn’t just the Kremlin, but Moscow as a phenomenon, that should be blamed for the city’s misfortunes.
“People see Moscow’s hand in everything, whether Moscow had to do anything with it or not,” said Lev Lurie, a historian of St. Petersburg, who is regarded as a guardian of local traditions.
According to Mr. Lurie, there are three reasons the church wanted to take control of the cathedral.
One is it wanted to restore it to its original purpose as a church, not a museum.
Second, the church wanted to demonstrate that it is capable of making such symbolic moves — and therefore solidify its position as one of the most influential institutions in Russia.
Finally, the church wanted to earn money. St. Isaac’s is one of the most lucrative museums in Russia, attracting almost 2.4 million tourists last year.
Aleksandr Pelin, one of the leading members of the St. Petersburg clergy and the most vocal supporter of the transfer, agreed there was a certain symbolism in the act. But he spoke vehemently against the idea that the church wanted to fill its coffers.
“These people just lie,” Mr. Pelin said. “Only a handful of marginal people, including L.G.B.T. movements and right-wing politicians, speak against this decision.”
Mr. Pelin said his dream was to organize a reconciliatory service
