U.S. Isn’t Building Arms Depot in the Philippines, Envoy Says
MANILA — The American ambassador to the Philippines said on Tuesday that President Rodrigo Duterte was mistaken when he accused Washington of building an arms depot and threatened to review a defense pact between the two nations.
The ambassador, Sung Kim, said there was never a plan to build any depots in the country, contrary to what Mr. Duterte said Monday at a predawn news conference.
“I think perhaps some misinformation was given to the president and that is why he made the statement expressing concerns about a possible weapons depot,” Mr. Kim said at a business forum. “The fact is, we are not building a weapons depot anywhere in the Philippines.”
He noted that Washington was pursuing projects related to the 2014 defense pact, the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement, which allows the rotation of American troops in the Philippines and for the American military to build temporary depots to pre-position or store equipment.
Mr. Kim said the agreement gave the American military access to five Philippine bases, including one on Palawan island that faces the South China Sea. However, the United States is barred from establishing permanent bases, even as the deal also gives Filipino troops access to American military equipment.
Mr. Duterte said at the news conference that he had information that showed the Americans were using the bases to store weapons to counter China, whose activity in the South China Sea has raised tensions in the region.
The president said Manila would be at a disadvantage if war broke out between Beijing and Washington. He warned that he would review and possibly “ultimately abrogate” the agreement.
“Now, here is my worry,” Mr. Duterte said. “This devil appears to be nailed here. This America, they are building a depot. They are unloading arms in the Philippines now.”
“I am serving notice to the armed forces of the United States — do not do it. I will not allow it,” Mr. Duterte said.
He did not reveal how he got his information, or whether it was vetted by the Philippine military and Defense Department.
Mr. Duterte had earlier said he would scale back joint military exercises with the United States as he seeks new defense alliances with China and Russia.
On Monday, he said he had an “urgent message” to China to help provide precision-guided arms to the Philippines. He did not elaborate.
