Live Briefing  Fatal Shooting at a Quebec City Mosque
■ Six men were killed and eight were wounded, some seriously, during an attack on a mosque in the Canadian city of Quebec during evening prayers on Sunday, according to the police. The six men were ages 39 to 60.
■ Thirty-nine worshipers who were at the mosque, the Islamic Cultural Center of Quebec, were unharmed, the police said.
■ Police officials said that one suspect had been arrested at the scene of the shooting and another was apprehended nearby, on Île d’Orleans. The police have not yet identified a motive for the attack.
At a news conference Monday morning, the authorities declined to comment on the identity or origin of the suspects.
The authorities said it was the first time that the police in the city had dealt with an attack of such magnitude. They repeated their characterization of the attack as an act of terrorism because of its size and style. Antiterrorism forces activated in response. One spokesman said that it might have been something else.
The police said all of the victims were men, although they revised their age range to 39 to 60.
One of the suspects fled by vehicle and called 911 at 8:10 p.m. Sunday, describing his actions and saying he wanted to cooperate. He gave his location and was quickly apprehended. Canadian television showed an abandoned gray Mitsubishi S.U.V. with the driver door open and emergency lights flashing. The police said neither of the suspects was known to the police.
Kellie Leitch, a conservative member of Parliament who has proposed screening immigrants for “Canadian values,” released a statement saying that “this outrageous act of violence is an attack not just on those gathered in a house of worship, but on the very fabric of Canadian society.”
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau issued a statement on behalf of himself and his wife after the shooting:
The leaders of the province and city of Quebec held a news conference Monday morning to express their solidarity with Muslims.
“We are with you. You are at home,” said Philippe Couillard, the premier of Quebec, addressing Muslims. “I have no doubt that one particular community, the Muslim community, was the target of this deadly attack.”
The officials are set to meet with Muslim leaders at 10 a.m. on Monday.
In a post on Twitter, Mr. Couillard called for solidarity with Muslims: “Let’s unite against violence. Solidarity with the Québécois of Muslim faith.”
Martin Coiteux, the provincial minister of public security, said that “the police systems for dealing with terrorist acts have been activated.”
In a post on Twitter, he said that “ensuring the safety of the population is our priority.”
Mr. Trudeau quickly responded to the shooting on Twitter:
Régis Labeaume, the mayor of Quebec, said in a statement that the city was in a state of shock.
“Quebec City is an open city, where all must be able to live in safety and respect,” he said.
Of the city’s roughly 765,000 people, 6,760 identified themselves as Muslim in the last national census. While Muslims make up a small percentage of the primarily-Roman Catholic city, they significantly outnumber members of Canada’s two main Protestant churches.
Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York said the police were providing additional protection for mosques there after the Quebec shooting, according to The Associated Press. “All New Yorkers should be vigilant. If you see something, say something,” he posted on Twitter.
The police in Montreal and other Canadian cities also plan to increase security at and around mosques, according to CBC.
Mohamed Yangui, the president of the mosque, was not present at the time of the attack, but he told the Toronto daily The Globe and Mail that evening prayers were usually attended by 60 to 100 people. He relayed the accounts of witnesses who told him that the assailants had reloaded their guns as they worked their way through two floors.
