Russian Airstrike Kills 3 Turkish Soldiers in Syria in ‘Friendly Fire’
BEIRUT, Lebanon — A Russian airstrike killed three Turkish soldiers in northern Syria on Thursday, an attack that both countries described as an accident. Still, it injected new tension into a volatile corner of the Syrian battlefield as new clashes erupted between Turkish-backed rebels and Russian-backed government forces.
Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, apologized in a phone call to his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, calling the deaths a “tragic incident,” according to official accounts from their governments. One Turkish official called it “friendly fire.”
Both countries appeared eager to avoid derailing their new cooperation in Syria, where they have been seeking to lead a new effort to resolve the complex six-year-old conflict, even as they support combatants on opposite sides.
But the incident between Turkey, a NATO member, and Russia, ratcheted up an already risky situation in northern Syria. It came as Syrian rebels fighting alongside Turkish troops clashed in that same area for the first time with pro-government forces working with Russian air cover.
The government and rebel forces are closing in from different directions on Al Bab, an Islamic State-held city that is the last urban area occupied by the extremist group west of Raqqa, its de facto capital. Both the government and rebel sides view Al Bab as a strategically important prize.
Turkey and the Syrian rebels it supports want the city to be part of a rebel-held zone they have carved out along the Turkish border.
Government forces, by contrast, want to stop the rebel advance at Al Bab to limit the size of the zone.
And both forces want credit, among Syrians and internationally, for defeating the extremists of the Islamic State.
Russia and Turkey have both said they were coordinating to ensure they and their Syrian partners did not come into conflict.
But on Thursday, artillery battles broke out between the pro- and anti-government forces, according to fighters on the ground in the Al Bab area. A few hours later came the Russian airstrike.
