Israel Moves Ahead on West Bank Settlements, but Guardedly
JERUSALEM — Israel is moving ahead with plans for a significant expansion of its settlements in the occupied West Bank, including apartments in the volatile city of Hebron and the first approval of a new settlement in 20 years.
But while the latest plans call for the eventual construction of thousands of new homes on the West Bank, when Israeli officials meet this week to review them, only several hundred housing units appear likely to be granted final approval.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is once again maneuvering on familiar ground, trying to balance the demands of his pro-settlement coalition partners with the opposition from the international community.
In restricting the number of final approvals now, however, his government may also be taking into account some other Israeli priorities. Among them are the campaign against Iran and the joint interests he has been pushing with Arab countries like Saudi Arabia, with which Israel has no formal diplomatic relations.
When the Israeli government announced last week that a planning committee convening on Tuesday and Wednesday would promote plans for 3,736 new housing units — which are at various stages of the long approval process — opponents of Israeli settlement in the West Bank were outraged. Critics in the pro-settlement camp were not satisfied, either, accusing Mr. Netanyahu of recycling announcements of plans that were still in their early stages of approval and engaging in political spin.
According to calculations by both sides, about 600 housing units will receive final approval before building. Final approval is also expected to be given for an additional 459 housing units in the urban settlement of Ma’ale Adumim, east of Jerusalem, though in that case bids for construction still need to be issued.
Oded Revivi, the chief foreign envoy of the Yesha Council that represents the settlers, complained that the amount of building being approved “does not accommodate even the natural growth” of the settler population.
The Trump administration has been more accommodating than its predecessors when it comes to Israeli settlement activity. But it has also called for restraint as it tries to foster a resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process with regional support and a coalition against Iran’s regional ambitions.
“That’s the tension: a government that wants to satisfy, or not upset, the American administration,” Mr. Revivi said, “and the demands of citizens whose needs are not being kept.”
Based on several meetings he had with Mr. Netanyahu, Mr. Revivi believes the Trump administration has not really drawn clear lines about what settlement it could live with.
“They said to the prime minister, ‘We are not going to put any limits on you, but just make sure that what you do doesn’t get us upset,’ Mr. Revivi said. “I think that’s where Prime Minister Netanyahu is: not knowing just how much he can pull the strings without getting the American administration upset.”
Most of the world considers the settlements, built in the territory that Israel captured from Jordan in the 1967 war — the heartland of any future Palestinian state — to be a violation of international law.
Hagit Ofran, who monitors construction for Peace Now, a leftist Israeli advocacy group that opposes settlement activity, said there had been a sharp acceleration in the promotion of plans compared with the last two years. The rate now, she said, is similar to that in 2014, which was a bumper year. (The relative slump in 2015 and 2016 might have been due to a glut.)
“The strategy is to confuse us,” Ms. Ofran said. And Israel, she said, is now allowing itself to build in places where it has held off for decades.
For example, approval is being given for 31 new apartments in the Jewish settlement in the heart of the contested and volatile city of Hebron, although that project is expected to be held up by a legal challenge by Hebron’s Palestinian-run City Hall.
And for the first time in 20 years, final approval is also being given for a new settlement, Amihai, to accommodate the families who were evacuated from the illegal Israeli outpost of Amona, which was built on private Palestinian land.
A bid for construction is expected to be issued for 300 units in the Beit El settlement that the government has been promising since 2012. And heavy machinery has been spotted in recent days carrying out soil-boring tests at Givat Hamatos, an area over the 1967 lines in southern Jerusalem. According to Peace Now, the infrastructure work is being done in preparation for the issuing of bids for the construction of 1,600 housing units in the area.
Anti-settlement groups say the construction in Givat Hamatos would drive a wedge between predominantly Palestinian East Jerusalem neighborhoods and Bethlehem, harming the contiguity of any future Palestinian state. The past promotion of plans there have prompted international condemnation.
In its official statement last week, the government declared: “During 2017, approximately 12,000 housing units in different stages of planning and construction will be approved, about four times the amount in 2016. Whoever claims that this is not a significant improvement is misleading the public.” But hinting at the need to take Israel’s broader interests into account, the statement also said, “Whoever believes that diplomatic considerations need not be taken into account is greatly mistaken.”
“There is nobody,” the statement concluded, “that does more for settlement, steadfastly and wisely, than Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.”
Hanan Ashrawi, a member of the executive committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, condemned the latest settlement plans. “Clearly, Israel is bent on entrenching the military occupation and its illegal settlement enterprise,” she said, “further reaffirming its intentions of displacing Palestine and replacing it with ‘Greater Israel.’”
Bezalel Smotrich, an Israeli lawmaker from the staunchly pro-settlement Jewish Home party, which sits in Mr. Netanyahu’s governing coalition, wrote a scathing online post accusing the prime minister’s staff of issuing “a sea of lying numbers.”
Mr. Smotrich blamed the Americans for not authorizing plans for industrial zones by the settlements, in part because they take up a lot of space. “Without industrial zones there is no employment, no livelihood and no existence,” he said.
The planning committee meeting this week convenes four times a year. Shaul Arieli, an Israeli expert on political geography who prepared maps for past negotiations with the Palestinians, and who is a strong advocate for the establishment of a Palestinian state alongside Israel, said final approval for about 600 units has become relatively “routine.”
But in the past, he said, about 75 percent of new building was inside the so-called settlement blocs, meaning areas mostly close to the 1967 line that Israel intends to keep in any future agreement with the Palestinians, possibly in return for land swaps. Over the last six or seven years, he said, up to half the new building has been deep in the West Bank, outside the blocs.
