A New Jakarta Governor Takes Office, and a Predecessor Sits in a Cell
JAKARTA, Indonesia — Anies Baswedan, a former education minister and university rector, was sworn in as governor of the Indonesian capital on Monday, ending the most bitterly contested race in the country’s democratic era and one that has raised questions about the Muslim-majority nation’s tolerance for ethnic and religious minorities.
Mr. Anies, 48, was sworn in on live national television by President Joko Widodo at the State Palace complex in Jakarta.
However, one prominent politician was notably absent: Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, Jakarta’s recently departed governor, who is serving a two-year prison sentence after being convicted of blaspheming Islam. He says the case was orchestrated by his political opponents to sabotage his re-election.
Mr. Basuki, 51, who is ethnic Chinese and popularly known as Ahok, was the incumbent governor and was handily leading in opinion polls over Mr. Anies and other candidates when he was accused of violating a blasphemy law by citing a verse from the Quran in a speech in September 2016 to argue that it was acceptable for Muslims to vote for a non-Muslim candidate.
Hard-line Islamic groups held large street protests — one of which turned violent — demanding that he be jailed or summarily executed.
Under public pressure, the Indonesian police declared Mr. Basuki a suspect, and he went on trial in December. He was convicted by the North Jakarta District Court on May 9, three weeks after being defeated in a runoff by Mr. Anies, who is Muslim.
While Mr. Anies was not publicly accused of orchestrating the street protests against Mr. Basuki by Islamic radicals, he did openly court their support and flaunted his own Muslim credentials in campaign advertising.
There was also an anonymous social media campaign targeting Mr. Basuki’s Chinese ethnicity and Protestant faith.
Indonesia is the world’s most populous Muslim-majority nation, but among its 250 million people are influential Christian, Hindu and Buddhist minorities.
In a speech to supporters at Jakarta’s City Hall after his inauguration, Mr. Anies sought to soothe lingering religious and ethnic tensions.
“Indonesia is not based on only one religion,” he said. “Unity should also be celebrated in Jakarta.”
Analysts said feelings had been raw since the electoral campaign and the imprisonment of Mr. Basuki, which could end his political career.
“There will be lingering resentment against Anies, especially among the middle class who supported Ahok,” said Philips J. Vermonte, the head of the politics and international relations department at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
“Whether or not the resentment will evaporate depends very much on how Anies governs,” he said. “The benchmark will be what Ahok had done right in Jakarta.”
Before the blasphemy allegations, Mr. Basuki was popular among Jakartans, acquiring a “get-things-done” reputation, overseeing huge infrastructure projects to reduce traffic congestion and chronic flooding in the city of more than 10 million and showing zero tolerance for corruption and incompetence among civil servants.
Mr. Basuki had followed the leadership model of his predecessor and political ally, Mr. Joko, who resigned as governor in 2014 after winning the country’s presidential election.
During his tenure as Jakarta governor, Mr. Joko expedited the construction of a rapid transit system and the rehabilitation of waterways and reservoirs to reduce monsoon season floods.
He also introduced a popular “smart card” program to help lower-class Jakartans pay for health care and children’s education.
Analysts say Mr. Anies, who ran on a populist platform but had never held public office, will have a short honeymoon.
Despite Jakarta’s being the nation’s political, social and economic center, around one-third of its residents earn less than $225 a month, much of the population lacks access to piped water, and open defecation remains common in its slums, according to government data.
“People think Ahok was a quick fixer — quick and effective — and some people perceive that Anies doesn’t have those qualities,” said Fabby Tumiwa, executive director at the Institute for Essential Services Reform in Jakarta.
“People will compare, and if people see that he doesn’t listen, it will be a disaster, and people will lose patience very soon.”
Despite their bitterness, some supporters of the former Jakarta governor say they are willing to give Mr. Anies a chance — at least for now.
“This is not what we had hoped for, and we know Ahok gave his best for Jakarta,” said Amalia Ayuningtyas, co-founder of Friends of Ahok, a grass-roots organization that had collected hundreds of thousands of signatures urging the former governor to run for re-election as an independent, to avoid unsavory political alliances.
“What some people and the courts said about him is not true. We will remind people about the high standards he set and what he delivered on.”
