Egypt’s Military Detains an Ex-General Seeking to Run for President
Egypt’s military detained a retired general for questioning on Tuesday, announcing an investigation into his bid to challenge President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi in an election scheduled for March.
In a rare audio statement, the military said it was taking “necessary legal action” against the retired general, Sami Anan, who announced his candidacy on Saturday. The statement accused Mr. Anan, who was the chief of the general staff of Egypt’s armed forces between 2005 and 2012, of “violations and crimes” including document forgery and “incitement against the armed forces.”
Mr. Anan was detained as he drove through the Nasr City neighborhood of Cairo, his son Samir said by telephone. “They forced him out of his car, led him into a van and left,” Samir said.
The elder Mr. Anan, 69, was not considered a strong challenger to Mr. Sisi, a former general who has ruled Egypt with an iron grip since 2014, when he was elected with 97 percent of the vote. But his detention does suggest how far Mr. Sisi is willing to go to clear the field of challengers — even if doing so means crossing senior figures inside the military establishment that is his political bedrock.
Three other potential presidential candidates have already dropped out of the race. Among them were the former prime minister Ahmed Shafik, who aides said had been pressured to quit under threat of prosecution on corruption charges, and Anwar Sadat, a nephew of the former president.
Mr. Sadat and other former candidates accused government officials of seeking to scupper their campaigns through intimidation and harassment. Printers and even hotels had refused to provide services on orders from government officials, they said.
The last significant challenger remaining in the race, the leftist lawyer Khaled Ali, will be disqualified if he fails to overturn a criminal conviction for public indecency on March 7. The prosecution followed a criminal complaint by a prominent supporter of Mr. Sisi.
Mr. Anan’s campaign lasted just four days. In announcing his candidacy on Saturday, he lashed out at Mr. Sisi’s record and pledged to appoint Hisham Geneina, a onetime anticorruption czar fired by Mr. Sisi, as vice president for human rights.
The choice appeared calculated to hit Mr. Sisi on some of his most sensitive points: his government’s notoriously weak human rights record, and the prosecution of Mr. Geneina, who was dismissed in 2016 as Egypt’s top auditor after he estimated that the country had lost $76 billion through corruption.
Mr. Geneina was later convicted of spreading false news and given a one-year suspended prison sentence. He is appealing the verdict, his lawyer said.
“They want to get rid of the competition,” said Mr. Anan’s son, Samir. “There is no other way to look at this.”
Mr. Anan’s candidacy coincided with a moment of unusual flux in the top ranks of Egypt’s security services. Last week, Mr. Sisi unexpectedly fired his spy chief, who had been considered a close ally. Three months earlier, Mr. Sisi dismissed his army chief in similarly unexplained circumstances.
Mr. Sisi officially announced his intention to run for a second term on Friday, but the series of abrupt changes stoked questions about whether Mr. Anan’s bid had been receiving quiet support in rival corners of the military.
“I’ve heard that he consulted with some other retired officers but not with active-duty leaders,” said Michael Wahid Hanna, an analyst with the Century Foundation. But, he added, the prosecution of Mr. Anan showed that Mr. Sisi still enjoyed unchallenged control over the military.
“We know that there are divisions and rivalries,” Mr. Hanna said. “But in terms of outward-facing decisions, Sisi and the regime still exert top-level control.”
The first round of voting is scheduled for March 26-28, with a second round possible in late April if no candidate wins a majority of votes. About 20 candidates are running against Mr. Sisi.
The Egyptian leader got a boost from Vice President Mike Pence, who arrived in Cairo on Saturday.
“The collaboration between the United States and Egypt has never been stronger,” Mr. Pence later told reporters, adding that the two leaders had discussed a variety of topics, including religious freedom, the faltering Israeli-Palestinian peace process and the status of two American citizens imprisoned in Egypt.
Mr. Sisi is pushing ahead with his campaign. On Tuesday, state media published a photograph of the president having his eyesight tested as part of the medical examination that is required for all candidates.
Later on Tuesday, military officers barged into Mr. Anan’s villa, where they searched the premises and confiscated documents, his campaign partner, Mr. Geneina, said.
