In a Syria Refuge, Extremists Exert Greater Control
BEIRUT, Lebanon — After surviving a siege by Syrian forces, Firas al-Rahim and his family were removed from a rebel-held area of Homs province in central Syria and taken to an impoverished territory in the northwest.
But since Mr. Rahim, his wife and their four children arrived in Idlib Province in May, they have struggled to find food and shelter, and the Syrian affiliate of Al Qaeda has come to dominate the area, raising fears that bombs targeting the jihadists could fall on them.
“We, the civilians, are stuck between an organization with an extreme ideology and an international community willing to fight it at all costs,” Mr. Rahim, a teacher, said by phone from Idlib Province.
After six years of war, Syria has been shattered into jagged chunks divided by hostile front lines maintained with the help of foreign powers and their spheres of influence: Turkey, Iran, Russia and the United States have all put forces on the ground to help their allies.
In that scramble for control by President Bashar al-Assad, by rebels and their international backers, and by radical jihadists, Idlib has become an end-of-the-line dumping ground for fleeing civilians and the largest bastion of the heavily armed local branch of Al Qaeda.
Western powers like the United States that would like to fight the extremists in Idlib are leery of endangering civilians and have invested heavily in local groups that oppose the jihadists.
The Syrian government and its allies, however, say Idlib is little more than a terrorist haven, where jihadists have imposed their control — a view some American officials share.
“Idlib Province is the largest Al Qaeda safe haven since 9/11,” Brett H. McGurk, the United States envoy to the coalition fighting the Islamic State, said last month. “Idlib now is a huge problem.”
Aid workers and residents say the situation there is more complicated, with a patchwork of groups struggling to provide necessary services to the civilians from all over Syria who have been bused to Idlib to live out the war. Though the extremist groups are militarily strong and the civilians have protested their presence, the militants have not systematically interfered with aid — at least not yet.
“Most people are thinking about the future, and they’re afraid of it,” said Nour Awwad, a media coordinator for Violet Organization, which works in Idlib. “But even if they’re afraid, where can they go?”
Much of Idilb, a poor, mostly rural province along the border
