   She’s pouring out her heart. 
   Kelleth Cuthbert is speaking out — and sharing her photobombing secrets — after garnered fame as “Fiji Water Girl” for unintentionally popping up in the background of numerous celebrity red carpet photos at the 76th Golden Globe Awards Sunday. 
   The 5-foot-9 Los Angeles-based Wilhelmina model was hired to hand out Fiji water bottles and ended up becoming a meme after her memorable facial expressions and camera stare-downs. 
   However, photobombing wasn’t something she had planned. 
   Cuthbert explained how photographers were rapidly taking shots, so she was just trying to properly react to her surroundings. 
   "You try to look at least somewhat pleasant and not have too much resting bitch face. You have to look somewhat friendly and happy to be engaging with people,” Cuthbert told Glamour. 
   "Sometimes you’re caught between a lot of cameras, so there’s a lot of photographers at different angles. You’re just kind of trapped sometimes. See that’s the thing: I feel like I was looking away, but sometimes I was looking so I could move out of the way." 
   She was photographed behind celebs such as Kaley Cuoco, Nicole Kidman, Jim Carrey, Judy Greer, Dakota Fanning and Jamie Lee Curtis. 
   “I had absolutely no idea what was happening because I obviously didn’t have my phone on me,” Cuthbert told PEOPLE. 
   “I felt very cut off from everything. I didn’t find out until the last stragglers of the red carpet were heading into the awards ceremony, and all these people walking by started shoving their phones in my face and showing me that I was trending on Twitter, but I didn’t understand the magnitude of it till later.” 
   Cuthbert’s new fame prompted her to jokingly disclose her photobombing tips. 
   If anyone is wondering how to be a perfect photo bomber, Glamour released an Instagram video with Cuthbert giving four tips. 
   She recommends making sultry eye contact, keeping props visible, smiling towards camera, and leaving enough room to pose.   
