   If you’ve ever felt something creeping behind you, it could be a ghost … or Fiji Water Girl. 
   A 5-foot-9, brown-haired, hazel-eyed woman stole the show at the 76th Golden Globe Awards on Sunday night and her photos are taking over the internet. 
   Kelleth Cuthbert, a promotional model for Fiji Water, was hired to hand out water bottles to A-listers on the red carpet — but she did so much more than expected. 
   The Los Angeles-based Cuthbert, signed by Wilhelmina Models, perfectly photo-bombed nearly all celebrities that crossed her path at the Beverly Hilton — including Richard Madden, Kaley Cuoco, Judy Greer, Nicole Kidman, Tony Shalhoub and Marin Hinkle. 
   She didn’t win a Golden Globe award for that, but she sure won the hearts of social media users. 
   “Not the worst way to spend a Sunday… #goldenglobesfijigirl #fijiwatergirl,” Cuthbert wrote in a caption on Instagram. 
   Cuthbert passed 100,000 followers on Instagram Monday as many have grown to love “Fiji Water Girl.” 
   “Needless to say this has been the strangest day of my life,” Cuthbert wrote on Facebook. 
   She was one of four models hired by Fiji Water, a sponsor of the award ceremony along with Lavazza, Lindt and Moët & Chandon. 
   The Toronto native, who was featured in Maxim in May 2016, stood out from the other models because of her red carpet placement and her camera stare-downs. 
   "We're so glad everyone is talking about our water! *senses ominous presence* She's right behind us, isn't she? #FIJIwatergirl,” the company tweeted. 
   Not only is everyone taking about the company’s water, but they were sharing funny memes with Cuthbert’s photo placed in. 
   Meme’s show Fiji Water Girl in scenes from “Bird Box” and “The Shining.” 
   Another meme on Twitter read, “AP Breaking: Fiji Water Girl Already has higher approval rating than @realDonaldTrump.” 
   Someone even created a Twitter account for Fiji Water Girl and claimed her to be the “first worldwide meme of 2019.” 
   “I've photobombed nobody. I was actually the only one there working,” one of the tweets read. 
   Despite the funny memes and new fame, Cuthbert taught us all an important lesson — if you’re not the star of the show or the most famous person in the room, you could still make a statement.   
