   A New Zealand airport security dog was fatally shot after he ran onto the airfield — leaving many distraught over his untimely death. 
   Grizz, a 10-month-old bearded collie mix, was training as a bomb-sniffing dog when he broke free around 4 a.m. Friday at Auckland Airport, according to media reports. 
   Aviation Security Services tried for three hours to capture the pooch, who was not on the tarmac, according to reports. 
   But officials said the prancing puppy's escapades held up 16 domestic and international flights. 
   "Auckland Airport staff directed police to shoot the Avsec dog, which was loose at the airport this morning," Tracy Phillips, police inspector, told the New Zealand Herald. "This is not an outcome anyone wanted, and police were only asked to be involved as a last resort." 
   A spokeswoman for the airport told Fairfax New Zealand that staff was devastated by the canine shooting. 
   "They did everything they could, but unfortunately the dog had to be shot," the spokeswoman, Lisa Mulitalo, told the news website. "We're really upset about it." 
   Officials added that Grizz's handler was grief stricken over the shooting. 
   Many of his fellow New Zealanders were distraught, too. 
   Juliette Banks, an author based in Auckland, tweeted her disgrace after Grizz's untimely death. 
   "Embarrassed to be a kiwi today. Killing a dog so flights can continue Auckland Airport. No excuse! Disgusting #poordog #aucklandairport," she wrote. 
   Hilary Barry, a morning news host for New Zealand's TVNZ, condemned the shooting on a Friday morning broadcast, arguing cops shouldn't have shot Grizz. 
   "They shot the dog. Do they not have a tranquilizer gun?" she said. "They shot it dead ... they've got to have tranquilizer guns, surely." 
   Callum Irvine of the New Zealand Veterinary Association said it's not a sure thing that tranquilizers will be around, however. 
   "There just isn't ready access to tranquilizer guns and darts in New Zealand," he told Fairfax New Zealand, "and even if authorities did manage to get their hands on one in time, there are so many other factors to take into consideration, like how close the animal is, the animal's weight, age, and how much adrenaline was also running through the body."   
