Russia Blocks U.N. Move to Renew Syria Chemical Weapons Inquiry
Russia blocked an American-sponsored United Nations Security Council resolution on Tuesday that would extend the life of a panel investigating who has committed chemical weapons assaults in the Syria war, in a session punctuated by Cold War-era acrimony.
The outcome undermined one of the few areas of international cooperation in seeking accountability for atrocities committed in the Syria war and cast fresh doubt on whether users of chemical weapons in the conflict will ever be held to account. The use of such weapons is a war crime.
Both sides accused each other of cynicism and dishonesty in acidic exchanges before and after the vote on the resolution, which was vetoed by Russia using its power as a permanent Security Council member.
It was the ninth time Russia had exercised its veto at the Security Council to block a resolution concerning the nearly seven-year-old conflict in Syria. Russia is the Syrian government’s most important ally.
The Russians had argued that a vote for a one-year extension of the panel, known as the Joint Investigative Mechanism, should not be held until after its report, due Thursday, on who was responsible for a deadly sarin nerve agent attack on April 4 in the northern Syrian village of Khan Sheikhoun, which is held by insurgents.
The United States, Britain and France have said the air force of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria carried out that attack. President Trump ordered a missile strike on the Syrian airfield where the Americans said the attack had originated, infuriating Russia and Syria.
Russia and Syria initially said that the sarin attack might have been fabricated, then suggested that insurgents on the ground were responsible. The Joint Investigative Mechanism’s conclusions are not yet known, but there is no dispute that sarin was used.
Because the panel’s mandate does not expire until Nov. 16, Russia’s ambassador, Vassily Nebenzia, said there was still plenty of time to assess the merits of renewal after the Khan Sheikhoun report is released.
Western members of the Security Council, led by the United States, said Russia already had signaled that it would oppose the panel’s continued existence if the report found the Syrian government culpable.
The basis for the clash at the Security Council began last week when the United States ambassador, Nikki R. Haley, circulated a draft resolution to have a quick vote on renewing the panel’s mandate.
Mr. Nebenzia said the Americans had known that Russia would seek to delay the vote and had plotted to force a veto to cause Russian embarrassment.
“Let’s not pretend we don’t understand what’s taking place here,” Mr. Nebenzia told the council on Tuesday shortly before the vote was held. “It’s intended, once again, to show up and dishonor Russia.”
He said the sequence of events leading up to the vote “was not very pleasant — it stinks, in fact.”
Ms. Haley did not attend the vote because she was traveling in Africa. Michele J. Sison, the deputy American permanent representative, said doubts about the panel’s longevity had already impeded work on its other investigations of chemical weapons use in Syria, and “we want this vote to take place today.”
Eleven countries voted in favor, Russia and Bolivia opposed it, and China and Kazakhstan abstained. Russia’s no-vote automatically doomed the resolution.
Ms. Haley released a statement saying: “Russia has once again demonstrated it will do whatever it takes to ensure the barbaric Assad regime never faces consequences for its continued use of chemicals as weapons.”
By blocking the vote to renew the investigative panel, Ms. Haley said, “Russia has made it clear that it does not care about stopping the use of chemical weapons in the world.”
The outcome does not necessarily threaten the panel’s continued existence. But without a new Security Council resolution to extend its mandate beyond mid-November, the panel will cease functioning in roughly three weeks.
Russian doubts about the panel’s objectivity first surfaced last year when it concluded that Syrian government forces had been responsible for at least three chlorine-bomb attacks in Syria.
The Russians had argued that the panel’s methods were faulty. They also questioned how it could produce an objective report on the Khan Sheikhoun assault because its investigators had never visited the village, in rebel-held territory of northern Idlib Province.
