Police Are Attacked in Chechnya; ISIS Claims Responsibility
MOSCOW — At least four police officers were injured on Monday in a series of attacks in the mountain republic of Chechnya, Russian law enforcement authorities said, raising fears of renewed violence in the restive region.
Three attacks occurred around the same time in different locations, the Investigative Committee, a Russian security agency, said in a statement: an assault outside a police station by two men armed with knives, an attempted suicide bombing and the running over of two officers with a vehicle in Grozny, the regional capital. No police officers were reported killed.
The Islamic State group’s official news agency claimed responsibility in a statement on the Telegram messaging app, describing the assailants as “fighters from the Islamic State.” It did not use the phrasing typically employed to describe an inspired attack, suggesting that it viewed those who carried out the violence as core members.
That represents an embarrassment to Ramzan A. Kadyrov, the strongman who rules Chechnya. The republic is formally a part of the Russian Federation, but the Kremlin, which has fought two brutal wars against a separatist insurgency there over the past three decades, gives Mr. Kadyrov a high degree of autonomy to crush dissent.
Mr. Kadyrov said in a statement that the main goal of the attacks on Monday had been “to create an illusion that some forces can still organize armed actions and terrorist acts.”
“There is no doubt that the young men were brainwashed via social networks,” Mr. Kadyrov added, saying of groups like the Islamic State: “The real picture is that they have absolutely no support, no social base in the republic. The situation in Grozny, in Chechnya is absolutely calm and stable.”
The assault by the two men with knives took place in Shali, in central Chechnya, the Investigative Committee said. Two officers guarding a police station were injured. The assailants were killed.
In the apparent attempted suicide bombing, the committee statement said, a young man detonated explosives near a traffic police checkpoint in Mesker-Yurt, a village near Grozny. He survived, according to Mr. Kadyrov’s statement, and was being treated in the hospital. Investigators said no one else was injured or killed.
Shortly after, an attacker ran over two police officers in central Grozny while being chased by other police officers, the Investigative Committee said. He was later killed.
A video said to depict the incident circulated on social media. It showed a white car rushing through an intersection and running over a police officer, who was standing on a pedestrian crossing.
The investigators opened three criminal cases on charges of attempting to murder police officers.
During his rule, Mr. Kadyrov has shown little tolerance of dissent. Critics and rivals have been pressured to leave, have been put behind bars, or have died under mysterious circumstances. International organizations suggest that public displays of loyalty hide significant opposition to his rule.
Mr. Kadyrov’s father, Akmad, fought against Moscow in the 1990s but later allied with President Vladimir V. Putin, who appointed him to run Chechnya in 2000. The elder Kadyrov died in a terrorist explosion in 2004; his son effectively ruled from then on but was formally appointed in 2007, when he turned 30.
Mr. Kadyrov controls personal security troops, known as Kadyrovtsy. Despite a heavy police presence in the region, armed clashes happen regularly in Chechnya. At least seven militants were killed in clashes in 2016. A gun battle in Grozny in 2014 left at least 20 people dead. 
