Flash Flood Kills at Least 9 Israeli Teenagers on ‘Bonding’ Hike
JERUSALEM — At least nine Israeli teenagers on a “bonding” trip were killed, and one was still missing, after a flash flood swept them away on Thursday while they were hiking in a riverbed near the Dead Sea.
Rescue workers, soldiers and volunteers in helicopters, jeeps and rubber boats and on foot frantically searched for the missing teenager as night fell in Wadi Tzafit, a popular hiking destination in dry weather that can become a death trap with little warning in a rainstorm.
Two youths were hospitalized for hypothermia and other injuries, and 13 were rescued unharmed, officials said. The fatalities were reported by Zaka, an Israeli rescue and recovery organization. Eight of the teenagers who died were women and one was a man, according to Israeli media reports.
A lack of regulatory oversight of the academy that arranged the field trip led quickly to recriminations between the Defense and Education Ministries, which share responsibility for approving such programs. The Israeli news media published text messages in which some of the teenagers expressed fears about the outing, and organizers reassured the doubters that they were well prepared and had the authorities’ approval to go ahead with it.
“I can’t believe I’m actually going on a trip in this weather,” one girl wrote in Hebrew to her friends on WhatsApp, according to the news site Mako, which said she was among those killed. “It doesn’t make sense that we go to a place that’s all floods. It’s tempting fate. We will die, I’m serious.”
The trip was led by Bnei Zion, a Tel Aviv-based leadership academy for high school graduates waiting to be called for military service. But Channel 12 in Israel reported that many in the group, including some who were killed, were prospective participants in the program who were still in their final year of high school.
All together, about 25 young people had been hiking in the riverbed in a canyon with “very deep slopes,” said Nadav Eylon, chief security officer for the Central Arava Regional Council, which oversees an area south of the Dead Sea.
Eran Doron, head of the nearby Ramat Negev Regional Council, described the site as “a canyon where the moment a flash flood comes, there is no way out.”
“There are walls of rock between four to 20 meters high on the sides of the canyon,” Mr. Doron added.
Officials said survivors reported that they heard the sound of rushing water only about a minute before being hit by the flash flood.
A police spokeswoman, Merav Lapidot, suggested that the youth group had disregarded police warnings, telling the Mako news site that, “to our regret, these incidents take place when orders are not followed.” She said the police had posted roadblocks in many areas warning of danger but could not be expected to close off every river in the country.
Mr. Eylon, speaking to the Ynet news site later, described the search and rescue effort. “We began combing the area and slowly found members of the group,” he said. “Some were wounded, some healthy and some in more serious condition. We found them in little groups, pairs and on their own. This is a complicated, grooved riverbed.”
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, in a statement, called the calamity a “grave disaster,” adding, “We all pray for better news.”
The hike was meant to be a three-day bonding experience for the participants, officials said.
An Israeli lawmaker, Yehudah Glick, said he had visited Bnei Zion’s offices and found its staff members, and other teenage participants who had not been on the trip to Wadi Tzafit, in tears and in shock.
“Everybody’s trying to collect crumbs of information that are coming in from all over, and mostly they’re trying to collect themselves and put themselves together, and really try to keep themselves in one piece, because they’re broken — they’re very, very much broken,” Mr. Glick said. “These are students that spent the last eight months together, almost 24 hours a day, and they’re close friends.”
Mr. Glick said the academy existed to let Israeli teenagers postpone their military service by a year and spend that time studying Israeli history, Zionism and other topics to make their army service more meaningful.
“Most are nonreligious, but they’re very much active in social issues, trying to help people who are suffering, and really involved on the most emotional level with Israeli society,” he said.
The police promised a full investigation, but early indications suggested that the academy and its outings fell into a regulatory vacuum, with neither the Education Ministry nor the Defense Ministry providing much supervision.
Flash floods in the Israeli desert can come with staggering force. After a heavy rainstorm in May 2001, flooding in Nahal Arugot, near Ein Gedi on the edge of the Dead Sea, destroyed a modern highway bridge that had been designed to withstand such weather and filled a canyon with stone and alluvium in quantities officials said had not been seen in 40 years.
Thursday was the second day of a storm that, in the usually arid south, flooded riverbeds with sudden, lethal effect. On Wednesday, two people were killed: An 18-year-old Palestinian shepherd was found near Ma’ale Amos, an Israeli settlement on the West Bank, a few miles from where he had disappeared, and a 17-year-old Bedouin was swept away in Wadi Mamshit, near Dimona.
In some places, Kan TV reported, the rainfall on Wednesday and Thursday alone totaled about a third of what is normal in a year.
Across the country, the weather seemed to keep trying to outdo itself, with hail the size of grapes and golf balls falling from Jerusalem to Mitzpe Ramon in the south, streets flooding and dozens of stranded motorists needing rescue. In Rishon Lezion, south of Tel Aviv, an acoustic ceiling collapsed, flooding a shopping mall. And the airport in Israel’s southernmost city, Eilat, had to be closed after torrential rain and hail left the runway covered with erosion.
