Chinese Fashion Designers Flock to City of T-Shirts and Flip-Flops
XIAMEN, China — In the seven years she lived in Beijing, Vega Zaishi Wang started her eponymous label and made her name as one of China’s top young fashion designers.
But the capital city’s grueling pace of life — the media, the parties, the pollution, the cost of living — was taking its toll. She struggled with depression so oppressive she named her 2014 autumn/winter collection “The Dark Night of the Soul.”
And so, last September, Ms. Wang finally made her escape. Like a bird in search of warmer climes, she fled south to Xiamen, a coastal city between Hong Kong and Shanghai. She set up a studio in a four-story mansion in a quiet neighborhood on Xiamen Island, just a short walk from the beach.
On a recent sunny afternoon, an ocean breeze blew in through the studio’s open windows. Gritty Beijing, so often blanketed in smog and traffic, felt like a world away.
“In Beijing, there was no such thing as work-life balance,” said Ms. Wang, 32, settling into a vintage raspberry-colored leather armchair. “But here in Xiamen, I can slow down my pace and focus on my collections. I’m much happier here.”
In moving to Xiamen, Ms. Wang became the latest addition to a small but robust community of up-and-coming young Chinese fashion designers who have forgone the glamour of cosmopolitan Shanghai and Beijing in favor of off-the-beaten-path Xiamen.
Known as the “Xiamen gang,” these designers — whose aesthetics range from elevated street wear to high-end fashion — are beloved by fashionistas from Beijing to Hong Kong. Their creations have been promenaded on the elite catwalks of London and Paris fashion weeks and have even inspired numerous knockoffs on Chinese e-commerce platforms like Alibaba’s Taobao.
In addition to Ms. Wang, their ranks include designers like Shangguan Zhe of Sankuanz and Liu Min of Ms Min. All three were featured last year in Opening Ceremony’s “Year of China,” for which the influential New York-based fashion retailer highlighted a select group of emerging Chinese designers.
Together, the designers are behind some of the most cutting-edge fashion trends coming out of China. That strikes many as curious, given they are working out of a city where the concept of fashion seems to be an afterthought.
“Xiamen is a place that doesn’t have any fashion,” said Dido Liu, founder of the Xiamen-based brand Deepmoss. “It’s so hot, most people just go out wearing T-shirts, shorts and flip-flops.”
The term “chill” comes up often in discussions about Xiamen. Visitors to the city stroll along boulevards lined with stately colonial buildings, the legacy of 19th-century European traders who once frequented the port of Xiamen — then known as Amoy — looking to exchange sugar and opium for Chinese tea and porcelain.
The more adventurous wander through Bashi, the bustling seafood market where fishermen drop off their daily hauls, or meander around Shapowei, a local art zone that comes alive at night with skateboarders and small vendors selling handmade jewelry and crafts. (Thank You Cafe in Shapowei, started by the designer Cotton Yu of Mymymy, is a favorite watering hole for the fashion gang.)
Residents often converse in Hokkien, the dialect native to the Fujian region. In language, culture and atmosphere, the city more closely resembles Taiwan, which is within swimming distance of Xiamen, than the frenetic metropolises of Beijing and Shanghai to the north.
But it is precisely Xiamen’s laid-back vibe that attracts designers like Ms. Liu. The harbor city of almost four million consistently ranks near the top in lists of most livable cities in China. Couples from around China flock to Xiamen to take romantic photos on the island’s beaches.
And what the city may lack in fashion sense, it more than makes up for with its abundant greenery, waterside cafe culture, and vibrant culinary scene. Here, an idea of a good night out means squeezing into a dimly lit hole-in-the-wall restaurant and feasting on fresh seafood and cold beer.
“Xiamen is one of those rare cities where you can work really hard and get a lot done but you can also relax,” said Ian Hylton, the president of Ms Min and former creative director of men’s wear for Ports, which maintains its China headquarters in Xiamen.
Unlike Ms. Wang, who sought out Xiamen as a refuge, the other designers in the so-called Xiamen gang settled here more by circumstance. Many, including Mr. Zhe, Ms. Liu of Deepmoss and Ms. Liu of Ms Min, grew up in the region.
But what keeps them here is more than inertia. Work-life balance aside, there are concrete incentives to running a fashion label out of Xiamen. For one, the operation costs can be much lower in Xiamen than in Shanghai, China’s de facto fashion capital, and Beijing, the nexus of China’s fashion media.
Ms. Wang estimated that she paid about one-quarter of what she would pay to rent a comparable studio space in Beijing. Skilled employees, like machinists, can also be easier to find, given the region’s history as a garment manufacturing hub.
Local designers can also apply for generous rent subsidies from the Xiamen city government, which has been eager to promote the city’s image as a contemporary fashion hub.
But taking government subsidies can come with challenges. Designers are often pressured by officials to participate in local government-sponsored fashion events. Accepting the benefits also subjects designers to strict regulations that often don’t take into account the nuances of the fashion design business.
The designer Wan Yifang discovered that reality recently when local officials seized on the sewing machines in her small subsidized studio space as a violation of the building’s fire code prohibiting production.
“The government doesn’t really know what it’s doing,” said Ms. Wan, who is currently looking for a new studio. “Design studios are really a new thing for them. They’ve never thought about how to differentiate between large-scale manufacturers and small design studios.”
Still, such drawbacks are minimal when compared with the city’s relaxed lifestyle and many conveniences. The ease of communication platforms like Tencent’s WeChat and the frequency of flights out of Xiamen have further bridged the gap, allowing local designers to tap into what has become a fast-moving fashion revolution in China, a country that just one generation ago had little option but to wear somber-colored Mao suits.
“Fashion in China moves so quickly,” said Timothy Parent, founder of China Fashion Bloggers, a blog about Chinese fashion. “In just a few decades, the concept of ‘made in China’ has become ‘designed in China.’ Instead of producing clothes, more and more people now want to create and design them.”
As a result, a growing number of young Chinese fashion designers are rising to the fore. Many, like Ms. Wang and Ms. Wan, are returning home after studying abroad at prestigious institutes like Central St. Martin’s in London, bringing with them a unique design language that fuses a multitude of influences and cultures.
“These days, Chinese designers are more international,” said Mr. Zhe, who created Sankuanz in 2008 and has since mentored many young local designers. “But of course, the sense of nationality — that sense of being Chinese — can be difficult to shake off.”
