Angela Merkel Condemns Charlottesville Violence as ‘Racist’ and ‘Evil’
BERLIN — Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany denounced the deadly violence that erupted around a demonstration by white supremacist groups in Charlottesville, Va., over the weekend as “racist,” “horrifying” and “evil,” and called for far-right violence to be condemned worldwide.
“It is racist, far-right violence and clear, forceful action must be taken against it, regardless of where in the world it happens,” Ms. Merkel said in an interview with the German public broadcasters Deutschlandfunk and Phoenix. She expressed her condolences for the family and friends of Heather D. Heyer, who was killed in the violence.
The chancellor declined to criticize the United States, noting that her own country still struggles with anti-Semitism and far-right extremists.
“Before we point our fingers at others, we need to take care of that which is happening at home,” Ms. Merkel said. “Of course that country is torn,” she said of the United States, “but what needs to be condemned is any form of violence, especially any forms of extreme or aggressive violence.”
Germany’s unique role in history, as the birthplace of the Nazi Party and the ensuing atrocities that followed its rise to power in the 1930s, has meant that generations since the party’s defeat in World War II have been raised to reject its xenophobic thinking. The cultural memory of this Nazi violence shapes modern Germany’s view of itself and its role in the world.
Unlike in the United States, where far-right extremists are free to brandish the emblematic red flags emblazoned with the black swastika against a white circle, all Nazi symbols, including the stiff-armed “Hitler salute,” are banned in Germany and Austria. Anyone displaying them can be fined.
A 41-year-old American who gave the salute in a bar in Dresden on Saturday is under investigation for his actions, the police there said. The man, who was not identified in keeping with German privacy law, suffered light injuries in a scuffle that followed his gesture, the police said. His assailant could also face charges.
Despite having some of the world’s strictest laws to limit far-right expression, Germany has struggled for decades with domestic neo-Nazi groups. Last year saw nearly 22,000 attacks motivated by far-right sentiment, a 42 percent increase from 2015, according to the domestic intelligence agency. Many of those attacks targeted recently arrived refugees and their shelters or homes.
In London, a spokesman for Prime Minister Theresa May said the British government condemned “racism, hatred and violence” and singled out the far right for specific criticism. Her spokesman, James Slack, in a briefing to reporters, avoided any direct critique of President Trump, and said that the president’s comments were “a matter for” Mr. Trump alone.
Mrs. May, who is currently on vacation, has been accused by some critics of trying to ingratiate herself with Mr. Trump in the hope of building stronger trading ties with the United States after Britain’s planned withdrawal from the European Union.
Italy’s prime minister, Paolo Gentiloni, also denounced the violence in Virginia, writing on Twitter that such condemnation “unites all the world. Racist hate will not prevail.”
That followed a tweet from Pope Francis on Sunday, which many Vatican observers considered an allusion to the events in Charlottesville.
The developments in Virginia, and moves by some religious leaders in the United States to defend Mr. Trump, came amid a debate within the Roman Catholic Church about the role of religion in the country’s polarized politics. Last month, an article by a Vatican-vetted journal accused ultraconservative American Catholics of joining with right-wing evangelicals in an alliance of “hate” to support Mr. Trump.
Marcelo Figueroa, an author of the essay and an Argentine Presbyterian minister close to Pope Francis, responded to a comment by Franklin Graham, the president of the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association, who cast “shame on the politicians who are trying to push blame” onto Mr. Trump. “For me. Sadness for the religious that attenuated responsibilities do not contribute to true peace,” Mr. Figueroa wrote on Twitter.
In China, where the government often highlights social tensions in the United States as a way of undermining democratic ideals, state-run news outlets prominently featured the violence in Charlottesville.
One article proclaimed, “Fire and fury has erupted in America,” echoing a threat Mr. Trump made against North Korea last week. Another article showed pictures of people holding torches under the words “Is this still America?”
With relations between the United States and China growing increasingly tense over issues like North Korea and trade, several commentators portrayed the Charlottesville episode as a sign of American chaos, contrasting it with the relative stability of China’s tightly controlled society.
“The world’s superpower is increasingly mired in chaos,” said an opinion piece in Global Times, a state-run publication that specializes in scathing critiques of the West. “The source of global instability may not be North Korea’s nuclear ambitions nor Europe’s refugee crisis, but the chaos in the U.S.”
The article added: “The power struggle in the 21st century is not entirely about technology, the military or economy. Social stability carries more weight.”
Although Mr. Trump was widely criticized in the United States for his reluctance to criticize white supremacists, Russian commentators seemed more forgiving.
In a segment on the Charlottesville episode, Rossiya-24, a state television channel, reported that while Mr. Trump was being blamed for the unrest, “the aggravation of the situation with rough justice by police against the black population” began under President Barack Obama.
Other outlets were more critical. Moskovsky Komsomolets, a Moscow-based tabloid, called Charlottesville “the capital of fascism” and speculated about “Why Trump is silent.”
In a Facebook post on Sunday, the Russian Embassy in Washington warned visitors not to travel to Charlottesville, citing “disturbances” in the area.
