Missing Widow of China’s Nobel Laureate, Liu Xiaobo, Surfaces in Video
BEIJING — The widow of Liu Xiaobo, the Chinese winner of the Nobel Peace Prize who died of cancer while under police guard last month, has resurfaced for the first time since his death in a brief online video pleading for privacy and time to recover from her grief.
But many supporters of Liu Xia, Mr. Liu’s widow, said the video of just over one minute appeared to have been made by Chinese security authorities who have kept Ms. Liu under secretive guard, cut off from family and friends.
In the video, which appeared on YouTube on Friday, Ms. Liu said in a weak, rasping, halting voice that she was away from Beijing and still recovering from the death of her husband, who was 61. Mr. Liu’s liver cancer was disclosed only after it was too late for real hope of a cure.
“Please give me time to grieve, give me time to recover psychologically,” Ms. Liu said in what appeared to be the living room of a home in a lush part of China. “Xiaobo treated life and death with equanimity, and I also need to straighten myself out. I’ll be with you again after I’ve made an overall improvement.”
No one has claimed credit for the video.
But it first appeared on a YouTube channel that has issued only videos echoing Chinese government views. Several of Ms. Liu’s friends said it seemed to have been made by the security police keeping her in unofficial custody, in an effort to repel calls from rights groups and foreign politicians who have called for her to be freed, and allowed to go abroad if she wants.
Mr. Liu was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2010 while imprisoned. He had been convicted and sentenced a year earlier for his outspoken criticisms of Communist Party rule and for helping organize a petition for democratic reform, Charter 08.
He was the first Nobel Peace Prize laureate to die in state custody since Carl von Ossietzky, a German pacifist and opponent of Nazism who won the prize in 1935 and died under guard in 1938.
After Mr. Liu won the prize, Ms. Liu was put under house arrest and pervasive surveillance by guards who kept away friends, supporters and journalists. After Mr. Liu died and his ashes were scattered at sea, Ms. Liu, 56, has remained out of touch, apparently under secretive guard.
Ms. Liu’s statement appeared made for viewers abroad: YouTube is blocked in China, and news of her and her husband is heavily censored here.
“I think this video of Liu Xia was made by the authorities,” said Hu Jia, a human-rights activist in Beijing who was friends with her and her husband. “We have no way of determining where she is and who is with her.”
