   An Australian Senator who blamed the New Zealand mosque attacks on Muslim immigration threw punches at a 17-year-old boy, who cracked an egg over his head in wake of the mass shootings. 
   Video recorded during his appearance before press in Melbourne, sees Senator Fraser Anning directly addressing cameras when the teen approaches him from behind, raising an egg over the politician’s shoulder. The moment it shatters, Anning whips around and throws two punches at the boy before several of his supporters step in to help, tackling the teen to the ground. 
   The 17-year-old was arrested and later released without charge, a Victoria police spokeswoman told 7 News. Authorities said no charges have been filed against Anning or the men who pinned the boy to the ground, adding that the entire incident is still under investigation. 
   Anning, a Queensland lawmaker, in a statement earlier in the day said New Zealand’s immigration policy prompted the carnage in the city of Christchurch Friday afternoon, adding that it highlights a “growing fear over an increasing Muslim presence.” 
   “As always, left-wing politicians and the media will rush to claim that the causes of today’s shootings lie with gun laws or those who hold nationalist views but this is all cliched nonsense,” he said. 
   “The real cause of bloodshed on New Zealand streets today is the immigration programme which allowed Muslim fanatics to migrate to New Zealand in the first place.” 
   Anning noted that he is “utterly opposed to any form of violence within our community and I totally condemn the actions of the gunman. 
   “However, whilst this kind of violent vigilantism can never be justified, what it highlights is the growing fear within our community, both in Australia and New Zealand, of the increasing Muslim presence,” he continued, dubbing Islam the “religious equivalent of fascism.” 
   He later took to Twitter to double down on his remarks. 
   “Does anyone still dispute the link between Muslim immigration and violence?” he asked. 
   In a follow-up tweet, Anning wrote: “I wonder if there will be as much outrage from the left wing when the next Muslim terrorist attack occurs? Most likely silence and talk about ‘lone wolf attacks, mental illness and no connection to Islam.’” 
   Anning’s remarks were in response to a targeted attack on two separate mosques in the city of Christchurch, located on a New Zealand’s south Island. At least 49 people were killed during weekly prayer service Friday afternoon — 30 of them at the Masjid Al Noor Mosque while at least another 10 were fatally shot at the Linwood Masjid Mosque. 
   Officials said dozens more, some of them children, were also seriously injured in what Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern dubbed a “clear” terrorist attack. 
   Three people were arrested in connection with the incident, including a 28-year-old from Australia, identified as Brenton Tarrant, who was charged with one count of first-degree murder during his initial court appearance. He’s accused of strapping a camera to his head and carrying out the shootings at both mosques. 
   Political leaders and people across social media were quick to rebuke Anning for his comments in wake of the New Zealand tragedy. Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison slammed the lawmaker in a series of tweets, writing that his “disgusting” views did not belong in parliament. 
   “New Zealand like Australia, is home to people from all faiths, cultures and backgrounds,” he said. “There is absolutely no place in either of our countries for the hatred and intolerance that has bred this extremist terrorist violence and we condemn it.” 
