   Early reports out of New Zealand suggest the shooter who killed at least 49 people in a terrorist attack Friday was carrying a cache of weapons and ammunition. 
   It’s not clear whether he was a licensed gun owner, but the case will likely ignite a debate on the country’s gun laws, which are considered restrictive, but imperfect. 
   New Zealanders must pass a background check that reviews criminal, medical, mental health and domestic violence records before they get a firearm license, according to GunPolicy.org, a firearm prevention group from Australia. Applicants also have to take a test on firearm safety and the law and must re-apply for their licenses every 10 years. 
   On the flip side, there is no limit on the number of guns or amount of ammunition a person can own. The minimum age for gun ownership is 16 years old, according to GunPolicy.org. 
   Retired FBI special agent James Gagliano, now a law enforcement analyst for CNN, told the network Friday morning that the country’s gun laws are pretty strict, but not as strict as Australia’s. 
   “Clearly there will be a lot of questions how this gunman got his hand on so many weapons,” he said. 
   The fire prevention group estimates New Zealand has about 1.5 million civilian-owned firearms, about one for every four people. 
   But Friday’s death toll in the city of Christchurch is a major abnormality, surpassing the country’s typical annual rate for firearm killings and overall murders. The attack comes a year after New Zealand saw its lowest murder rate in four decades — 35 — and following years of single-digit gun homicides. 
   In a country of 4.8 million residents, police data show the country saw about seven murders for every million people in 2017. Between 2012 and 2016, firearm deaths ranged from four to nine a year, according to a 2018 report by New Zealand authorities. 
   New Zealand’s gun regulations changed after a 1990 massacre in Aramoana, where a gunman killed 13 people in a shooting followed by an arson attack. The episode led to restrictions on military-style semiautomatic weapons, stricter storage requirements and other regulations. 
   GunPolicy.org founder Philip Alpers told CNN Friday that New Zealand has a small, but vocal gun lobby. 
   “In New Zealand the gun lobby has gone from strength to strength and has dominated policy advice to the police and government,” he said.   
