   New York State Police and the NYPD ramped up security outside mosques and Muslim community centers in the city following the New Zealand shooting spree that killed dozens — while faith leaders called for a show of strength against hate. 
   At least 49 people were killed during attacks on two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, during Friday afternoon prayers there. More than 20 others were seriously wounded. One person was charged with murder and two others were detained in connection with the attacks. 
   NYPD Commissioner James O’Neill said there had been no threats to any of New York City’s mosques — but extra patrols were assigned as a precaution. 
   Mayor de Blasio, speaking at an Islamic cultural center in Manhattan after Friday prayers, said he wanted to send a “clear message” of support to those affected. 
   “This city knows the pain of terrorism, we know the danger of discrimination, how it could turn violent, how it could tear families apart. So we stand in solidarity with the community, with the people the of Christchurch as they go through this pain,” he said, before holding a moment of silence. 
    
   Earlier Friday, Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams — standing with a dozen politicians, religious leaders and community members came together outside the Makki Masjid Community Center in Brooklyn — blamed the United States in part for spreading a culture of hatred. 
   “At one time our flag was representative of the birth of democracy, but it appears that now we have become the birth of hatred and we need to do everything we can to stop this,” Adams said. 
   Afaf Nasher, New York executive director of the Council on American–Islamic Relations, urged New York’s Muslim community leaders to take extra safety precautions. 
   “Mosques and other places of worship are sacred and are meant to be a place of refuge for worshipers,” said Nasher. “Our leaders at every level must forcefully condemn and work to stem the tide of anti-Muslim and anti-immigrant hate that is infecting our nation and world.” 
   But Imam Soyleimane Komate, of the Mashid Aqsa Salam mosque in East Harlem, said he does not fear an attack in New York City. 
   "I've been contacted by several officers to see if we need any help," said Komate. "We're OK. We're not afraid because New York is prepared." 
   Komate will be one of hundreds of New Yorkers expected to gather at the Islamic Cultural Center at 1711 Third Ave., where the mayor is slated to speak at 5 p.m. 
   “We invite everybody,” Komate said. “We don't hate anybody because of their religion....As humans, we're all one.”   
