   Adrian Hayes is an extremist, and proud of it. 
   He’s been to the North Pole, the South Pole and Mount Everest — the top, the bottom and the peak of the world. He’s trekked the vast Arabian Desert. So what do you do for an encore? 
   Hayes provides the answer in “One Man's Climb: A Journey of Trauma, Tragedy, and Triumph on K2.” 
   So remote it doesn’t even have a real name, K2 is, at 28,251 feet, the world’s second-biggest mountain. Its icy sides are steep and exposed. Looming over the China/Pakistan border, it’s prone to heavy storms, and avalanches. 
   In more than 150 years of mountaineering, only about 300 adventurers have reached the summit. Nearly 80 people have died trying. When Hayes told friends and family what he was planning, they had one response. 
   “You’re crazy.” 
   Their diagnosis may not have been off base. Just getting to the foot of K2 starts with a weeklong trek across a glacier. And once you get there, there is no there, just bleak, uninhabited space. Everything, from housing and communications to food and first aid, has to be carried in. 
   It’s not a job for the faint of heart, or light of wallet. 
   It never has been. The mountain wasn’t even surveyed until 1852, and the first known climbing attempt was in 1902, an expedition of upper-class mountaineers including self-proclaimed warlock Aleister Crowley. They made it to about 20,000 feet before turning back. 
   For another half-century, the failures mounted. 
   In 1954, an Italian team finally reached the summit. Twenty-three years later, another climber successfully reached the top. Yet while the mountain has increasingly attracted adventurers since, expeditions remain dangerous and expensive. 
   That had been enough to dissuade Hayes, at first. That and the solemn promise to his current girlfriend not to try, and his worries about leaving his children from a former relationship fatherless. 
   But then Hayes and his girlfriend broke up, and a custody battle with his ex separated him from his kids. The adventurer decided any promises he made to himself or others were now null and void. 
   He made a long list of corporate sponsors and began to prepare. 
   Based in the United Arab Emirates, Hayes spends much of the year working as a motivational speaker. He has his own methods of training. One exercise regimen consists of running up and down stairs in a high rise; another is climbing dunes in the desert. 
   Other methods are even more extreme but necessary. At this level of mountaineering, if the fall doesn’t kill you, the altitude will. 
   Above 20,000 feet, physical exertion becomes difficult; above 25,000 feet, life itself is endangered. Mountaineers acclimate themselves in advance by sleeping in oxygen tents that limit the amount of air. Another aid during the climb is Viagra — not in case of unexpected romance, but to increase blood flow all over the body. 
   Still, any high-altitude expedition is punishing. There is the risk of frostbite, phlebitis and stroke. A climber’s lungs or brain can fill with fluid. There’s also nausea and diarrhea, due to the thin air and typically poor hygiene. And — thanks to the changing pressure in the body — constant flatulence. 
   None of that stopped Hayes from setting off with two other mountaineers and four experienced guides in the summer of 2013. 
   It wasn’t an easy journey. First, everyone had to get to Pakistan. Then it was across the glacier to set up base camp. Not surprisingly, given K2’s recent popularity, there were six other teams there, with climbers from 20 nations. 
   Despite the diversity, Hayes writes, there is such a thing as a typical climber. And, the picture isn’t entirely flattering. He is an alpha male, a loner. And, not surprisingly, he rarely seems to be in a successful relationship. 
   Hayes and his team decided on an expedition-style ascent, which meant pauses at various base camps along the way. At first, it went well. But by the time they reached the second cliffside camp, the snow was heavy. 
   One by one, the climbers decided to abandon the ascent. Hayes reluctantly followed them. But two stubborn mountaineers, a father, and son from New Zealand pushed on. They made it up to the third camp while Hayes and the others returned to base. 
   Then all radio communication from the Kiwis ceased. An avalanche silenced all. K2 had claimed two more. 
   Hayes returned home, mourning his colleagues and depressed about his own failure. But then, slowly, his personal life began to improve. He started to resolve the custody issues with his children. And his new girlfriend, an American, became pregnant. 
   Life was on an uptick, so, naturally, Hayes did exactly what any other mountain-climber would do: He decided to go back to K2. 
   After another round of preparation, Hayes returned to Pakistan with a new team in the summer of 2014. After another weeklong trek over the glacier, and the hard work of setting up base camp, followed by a Buddhist blessing ceremony, for good luck, they set off. 
   This time snowstorms weren’t a problem. Heat was. The sun beat down on the climbers, and Hayes — who had suffered five cases of heat stroke or exhaustion in the last six years — felt particularly weakened. 
   There was another, more personal problem: his bowels. But there was no place to stop and — thankfully for the climbers on the ropes beneath him — Hayes refused to simply unzip the back of his suit and let loose. 
   So he gritted his teeth, clenched his cheeks, and climbed on. 
   Finally, at a little past 3 in the afternoon on July 26, 2014, they reached the summit of K2, the second-highest point on Earth. Hayes was only the eighth Briton in history to stand there. 
   As thrilling as it was, the achievement wasn’t one to linger over. The top of K2 isn’t much bigger than a tennis court, and at 28,251 feet there’s little air to breathe. Hayes stayed five minutes, waved the Union Jack and took a few selfies. 
   Then it was time to come down — actually, an even more dangerous trip. By this point, climbers are often in their worst physical shape — exhausted, nauseous, light-headed and sleep-deprived. Disasters lurk. 
   Reaching Camp 4, Hayes was finally able to relieve himself — 21 long hours after his first cramps. Someone had pilfered their cache of supplies; several spare oxygen bottles were missing. So much for the brotherhood of mountaineering. 
   After an uncomfortable night, they resumed their climb down. Soon they were back at base camp, being met by hot tea and their cook’s improvised attempt at pizza. 
   But there were disappointments ahead. Hayes later learned one climber died, probably of acute altitude sickness, after summiting. Another blatantly lied about reaching the top. 
   And Hayes watched as the commercialization of K2 picked up speed. Deluxe tours now offer well-heeled adventurers their own once-in-a-lifetime trek for $300,000 apiece. Trash, human waste and, gruesomely, human remains, increasingly litter the mountain’s slopes. 
   But, back at sea level, Hayes has a new son. He has repaired relationships with his older children. He continues to travel the world, lecturing and inspiring business leaders. And Hayes knows something, deep in his heart. 
   He did it. 
