China to Plant ‘Green Necklace’ of Trees Around Beijing to Fight Smog
Senior Chinese officials have tried tackling their country’s chronic air-pollution problem in piecemeal ways — fining some polluting companies, investing in alternative energy sources and ordering lower-level officials to enforce standards, for example.
To the dismay of many, pollution levels remain among the worst in the world, even if some official statistics point to slight improvements.
Now, officials in Hebei Province, which surrounds Beijing, have decided to create what they call a “green necklace” of trees in hopes of clearing the air. Hebei is filled with coal-powered steel factories and has the most polluted cities in China. The pollution from the factories is responsible for much of the smog in Beijing, a city of more than 22 million, and other parts of northern China.
The “green necklace” plan was announced Thursday on the Hebei provincial government website. The announcement referred to details that appeared in a March 15 document about coordinating development in Hebei and Beijing.
The plan aims to increase forest coverage on the Hebei-Beijing border, in part by tapping into rivers, reservoirs, wetlands and farmland, an official statement said. Though the plan calls for greater wetlands preservation, it does not mention that Beijing suffers from a chronic drought, so there is very little water on which to draw.
The plan also emphasizes the need for “ventilation corridors” that would channel wind and air movement to help disperse smog. In February 2016, Chinese news organizations reported that Beijing officials were considering creating five giant “ventilation corridors,” each at least 1,500 feet wide, to run through the city and improve air circulation. The reports said officials were also considering constructing an unspecified number of narrower corridors.
Earlier that month, the website of the government-controlled China Science Daily, officially called Science Times in English, published an opinion article that said the root cause of the smog in Beijing was declining wind strength. And one of the factors behind that was the planting of trees where none had existed before, the article said.
That would seem to contradict the official claims that creating a “green necklace” around Beijing would reduce pollution levels.
China has tried ambitious tree-planting projects before to address environmental problems. The most famous have been in the Inner Mongolia region and other parts of northern China, where people have been ordered or encouraged to plant trees to hold back the spread of the Gobi Desert. Scientists have debated the extent to which those measures help, and deserts have continued expanding in critical regions.
Some environmental experts say the real solution to the pollution crisis around Beijing and Hebei is to shut down significant numbers of steel factories in the region. Powerful official interests and state-owned enterprises have opposed such moves.
On Thursday, Anders Hove, an associate director of research in the Beijing office of the Paulson Institute, which does environmental advocacy work, commented on the “green necklace” plan on Twitter. “Cutting Hebei steel emissions would be both cheaper and faster,” Mr. Hove wrote. “But widely perceived as too hard.”
Beijing officials have experimented with other approaches on the margins. Last week, Legal Daily, an official publication, reported that police officers in Beijing had detained an employee of a heating company for actions that had led to greater pollution. The man, whose surname was given as Zhao, had overseen the shutdown of desulfurization equipment, the report said.
When an inspection team of police officers and environmental officials visited the plant in western Beijing on March 4, they found that a boiler at the plant emitted more than 10 times the amount of permitted sulfur dioxide, the report said.
Officials fined the company and interrogated Mr. Zhao, who was detained on March 13 after confessing, the report said.
Legal Daily said this was the first time the police had detained a worker under a strengthened environmental protection law that went into effect in January 2015. New regulations listed 23 circumstances under which company employees could be put under administrative detention for causing pollution.
Alex L. Wang, a law professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, who studies Chinese environmental regulations, said although this case was apparently a first for Beijing, regulators in other parts of the country had been using administrative detention. He cited a study that said there had been at least 2,079 cases nationwide since 2015.
“We need to know much more about how these detentions are being implemented,” Mr. Wang said. “As potential penalties increase, the opportunity for police abuse increases. Are there procedural protections in place to protect citizens from state overreach?”
“We need to know whether these detentions target the right people,” he added. “Are these examples of line-level workers being scapegoated for the decisions of their bosses? And in the end, are authorities using their detention powers in a way that actually improves environmental performance?”
