U.N. Peacekeeping Faces Overhaul as U.S. Threatens to Cut Funding
UNITED NATIONS — They are the ubiquitous face of the United Nations system: blue-helmeted peacekeepers scattered around the world’s war zones.
But with the Trump administration threatening to cut funds for the United Nations and rethink the very utility of peacekeeping, the blue helmets are facing a significant overhaul that could affect the lives of civilians and, ultimately, the organization’s reputation.
The American ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki R. Haley, has promised to undertake a mission-by-mission review of peacekeeping, as part of her get-tough approach to international diplomacy. The United Nations secretary general, António Guterres, meanwhile, is striving to slim down operations himself, in an effort to prevent an increasingly insular United States from gutting the organization altogether.
Ms. Haley wants her fellow Security Council members to debate early next month whether peacekeeping is still “fit for purpose,” according to a note from her office to fellow council members.
The note, seen by The New York Times, poses existential questions that are raising concerns among world powers, like France, that advocate robust peacekeeping operations. “Council members are encouraged to review missions and identify areas where mandates no longer match political realities,” it says.
Peacekeeping is the organization’s most costly undertaking, but it is still relatively inexpensive for the United States. It costs $7.87 billion to fund 16 peacekeeping missions worldwide, from Cyprus to Mali to a tiny observer mission in Kashmir. American taxpayers pay just over 28 percent of that budget — about $2.2 billion, equivalent to the cost of two B-2 bombers. (The United States Air Force has 20.)
In 2015, the United States was the country with the most procurement contracts for the United Nations peacekeeping system, with $1.6 billion in goods and services.
Among the nearly 92,000 uniformed personnel, there are fewer than 70 American soldiers and police officers. The largest numbers come from Ethiopia, India and Pakistan — and diplomats here say some troop contributors, who after all have a financial incentive to maintain the status quo, will push back if they sense that Mr. Guterres is bending over backward to please the Trump administration.
The drive to revamp peacekeeping represents Ms. Haley’s first foray into the changes she says she wants at the United Nations. Her first challenge, set to unfold in the coming days, is over how to deal with the United Nations’ biggest mission: in the 
