Court Awards $1 Million for Victims of Congolese Warlord
PARIS — The International Criminal Court on Friday found a former militia leader liable for $1 million in reparations to his victims and their relatives in a village in the Democratic Republic of Congo. It ordered that payments be made in small amounts of cash to individuals and used for projects benefiting the wider community.
Noting that the militia leader, Germain Katanga, is imprisoned and penniless, the judges requested that the awards be paid out by the court’s Trust Fund for Victims, which was created for this purpose.
The ruling is notable for the court because it identifies the victims, estimates losses, sets amounts and directs the spending of funds. The court had ordered reparations in an earlier case involving  Thomas Lubanga, a rebel leader, but those details have not been worked out.
Unlike international tribunals that adjudicate war crimes and crimes against humanity, the International Criminal Court, based in The Hague, stands apart because its mandate specifies that reparations to victims must be part of international justice.
Mr. Katanga was convicted in 2014 of playing a role in an attack on Bogoro in 2003. His militia killed about 200 people, raped women, and pillaged and burned homes in the village. He has served a sentence but is now jailed in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where he faces other charges.
In the court’s estimate, “the physical, material and psychological harm suffered by the victims” of Bogoro amounted to more than $3.7 million, but the judges set Mr. Katanga’s liability at $1 million.
The ruling awarded 297 victims payments of $250 each, an amount described as “symbolic” and not intended to compensate “for the entirety of the harm.” It also called for collective reparations to go toward projects covering housing, education, psychological support and activities to generate income in and around Bogoro in the Ituri region of the country. About 800 people lived in Bogoro at the time of the attack; today there are about 2,000.
Pieter de Baan, the director of the Trust Fund for Victims, said he visited Bogoro last month to work with community leaders. “It’s important that any award money, who gets it, how it is spent in the community is well understood and accepted,” Mr. de Baan said.
Some victims fled after the violence, he said, and some of the attackers have moved in.
The cash payments, though small, are significant in the impoverished and still insecure region, he said.
The court has asked the fund to come up with a detailed plan for the projects to be financed with the reparations.
Mr. de Baan said that during his visit, residents of Bogoro insisted on the need for education for their children and vocational training for themselves.
Housing projects may not be needed because people have rebuilt since the attacks, he said. He said they might want to use the money for microloans to start businesses, like shops, hairdressers or tailors, or for buying cattle or tools to work the land.
The fund, though linked to the court, is separately managed. Financing has come from governments, corporations and individuals.
Although it has earmarked $5 million for reparations for victims, it has financed other activities in countries where the court is handling cases.
Mr. de Baan said such projects included vocational training for former child soldiers in central Africa and hundreds of reconstructive surgeries in Uganda, where brutal gangs have cut off the ears, noses or lips of their victims.
