At Russia’s Victory Day Parade, Vladimir Putin Calls for Alliance
MOSCOW — Russia rolled out a rather subdued version of its annual Victory Day parade on Tuesday, with President Vladimir V. Putin calling for international cooperation in fighting terrorism even though foreign leaders had mostly stayed away.
In his 17 years as the leader of Russia, Mr. Putin has gradually made Victory Day the most important holiday of the year, tying his presidency to the national unity, sacrifice and centralized authority required to defeat Nazi Germany.
“The lessons of the past war call on us to be vigilant, and the Russian armed forces are ready to counter any potential aggression,” Mr. Putin said, after some 10,000 troops paraded and 114 pieces of equipment — by official count — rumbled across the cobblestones of Red Square.
Despite Mr. Putin’s call for cooperation, the parade served as a reminder of just how isolated Russia has become, particularly in light of strained ties with the West over a variety of issues, including the 2014 crisis in Ukraine and accusations of election meddling.
Just one foreign leader stood in the reviewing stand amid the ranks of Russian officials and military veterans: Igor Dodon, the recently elected pro-Russian president of Moldova, a former Soviet republic. In past years, the annual parades have been attended by the leaders of China, Germany and the United States, among others.
The parade marked the 72nd anniversary of the defeat of the Nazis in World War II, during which the Soviet Union lost more than 20 million people, and Mr. Putin used the occasion to call for an effective fight against “terrorism, extremism, neo-Nazism and other threats.”
In a sign of the constant menace that terrorism poses to Russia, the Ministry of Defense issued a statement on Tuesday denying that the Islamic State had killed one of its servicemen in Syria. All Russian troops in Syria are “alive, healthy” and at work, according to the ministry statement.
Victory Day military parades in major Russian cities are followed by marches of ordinary citizens carrying pictures of relatives who fought in the war. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, take part in the tribute to the “Immortal Regiment.”
In one discordant episode widely reported on Russian state-run television, clashes broke out at memorial services in the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, and in at least one other Ukrainian city, between those marking the holiday and local nationalists opposed to Russia.
Speaking in Kiev, Petro O. Poroshenko, the Ukrainian president, noted that this would be the last year Ukraine celebrated Victory Day in tandem with Russia. Next year, it plans to move the holiday to May 8, when it is marked in much of Europe.
Mr. Poroshenko accused Russia of using the holiday to celebrate its military incursions into Ukraine. The Kremlin has long denied that its military is directly involved in the fighting there.
That Russia celebrates Victory Day a day later than the rest of Europe reflects tensions at the end of the war that have never quite receded; many in the country feel it was insufficiently recognized for the sacrifices made to defeat the Nazis.
“There was not, there is not and there will never be a power that could defeat our people,” Mr. Putin said at the main parade after row upon row of soldiers had marched past in tight formation.
On Tuesday, the weather in Moscow was the most tangible cause of the restrained mood. Low, roiling, gray clouds and intermittent rain forced the cancellation of what is usually a carefully choreographed, roaring flyover featuring everything from sleek jet fighters to old, lumbering long-range bombers.
Despite the absence of the air force, some of the traditional greatest hits rumbled through Red Square, including tanks, and the Yars and Iskander missile systems capable of launching long-range nuclear warheads.
Mr. Putin pledged in 2012 to spend about $400 billion over a decade to modernize the military. Economic problems tied to the collapse in oil prices and economic sanctions imposed after the Ukraine crisis have forced some defense cutbacks, but the investment remains considerable.
This year, for example, for the first time, air defense missile systems painted in the white camouflage colors of the Arctic were used in the parade, emphasizing the Russian military’s expanding reach into the country’s oil-rich northern regions.
Russian state television also showed parades from across the country. To emphasize the military’s continuing involvement overseas, units at the Hmeymim air base in Syria, Russia’s most significant new base outside its borders since the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union, were shown marching in their own Victory Day parade.
The Islamic State released a video on Monday that it said showed the beheading of a Russian intelligence officer whom it accused of spying in Syria. The footage, published on SITE, a website that tracks the movements of radical groups, identified the victim as Capt. Yevgeny Petrenko, 36, who it said had infiltrated Islamist militant groups inside Russia, in the northern Caucasus and in Kazakhstan, before trying to do the same in Syria.
Thousands of militants from Russia and its former republics have gone to Syria, and Russia has vowed to fight them there rather than at home.
