North Korea Last Hosted a Chinese President in 2005. Here’s How It Went.
SEOUL, South Korea — The last time a Chinese leader visited North Korea — when President Hu Jintao went in 2005 — he and Kim Jong-il, then the North’s leader, kept up a tradition by hugging three times at the airport, their cheeks touching.
On Thursday, when President Xi Jinping of China visits Mr. Kim’s son and successor, Kim Jong-un, there may not be that degree of affection. But with both leaders in separate confrontations with the Trump administration — one over trade, the other over nuclear weapons — they may need each other more than their predecessors did.
“Until now, we have not seen Xi giving the same warm regard to Kim Jong-un, his junior by 31 years, although they have met four times,” said Lee Seong-hyon, an analyst at the Sejong Institute in South Korea, comparing the leaders’ relationship to that of their predecessors.
“But China and North Korea are now finding more common ground than ever, driven by their common adversary: the United States,” Mr. Lee said. “As the trade war between Beijing and Washington intensifies, North Korea’s geopolitical value to China has only increased.”
[Here’s what to expect from a state visit between the leaders of China and North Korea while each are locked in a dispute with the United States.]
Mr. Hu’s visit was not the first by a Chinese leader. Jiang Zemin, Mr. Hu’s predecessor, visited in 1990 and in 2001. Deng Xiaoping visited in 1978. He again visited in 1982 for the 70th birthday of Kim Il-sung, the founder of North Korea and the ruling Kim dynasty. And in 1963, Liu Shaoqi, who was then China’s president but was subordinate to Mao Zedong, spent 13 days there, meeting with Kim Il-sung.
China and North Korea trace their relationship to the early 20th century, when Chinese and Korean guerrillas fought together against Japanese colonialists. After the defeat of Japan during World War II, North Korea — under the leadership of Kim Il-sung — aided Mao’s Red Army in routing the Nationalists to Taiwan. China later sent troops to help North Korea during the 1950-53 Korean War.
Under first-generation revolutionary leaders like Mao, Mr. Deng and Kim Il-sung, China and North Korea engaged in brisk exchanges of high-level visits. But the countries began slowly drifting apart, especially after Mr. Deng started opening China to foreign investment and the global market in the late 1970s and the 1980s, turning the country into one of the world’s fastest-growing economies. North Korea stuck to the centrally planned economic system, denouncing China’s economic reforms as revisionist.
Relations cooled further when China established diplomatic ties with South Korea in 1992. Around that time, the first signs emerged that North Korea was secretly building nuclear weapons, after losing many friends in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet bloc.
When Mr. Hu visited in 2005, a tariff war between the United States and China was far from anyone’s mind. But North Korea’s nuclear program was very much in the news.
Mr. Hu had assumed China’s top leadership in late 2002, just as developments over North Korea were taking a turn for the worse. Washington accused the North of secretly running a uranium enrichment program, and it suspended shipments of heavy oil promised under a 1994 denuclearization deal.
The North expelled United Nations experts who were monitoring compliance with that deal, removed the seals from its mothballed nuclear facilities and declared that it would leave the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
China, then as now, was North Korea’s only major ally. But Mr. Hu refused to grace North Korea with a state visit until there was progress in the so-called six-nation talks, multilateral negotiations over the North’s nuclear program that began in 2003, hosted by China.
A breakthrough — short-lived, as it turned out — came with a broad agreement in September 2005, in which North Korea said it would fully abandon its nuclear program. In return, the United States promised aid and normal ties, and it renounced any intention of invading the North.
Mr. Hu rewarded Kim Jong-il with his visit a month later. At a banquet, Mr. Hu pitched the benefits of economic reform to his North Korean hosts, pointing to China’s astonishing growth since the late 1970s. Kim Jong-il did not commit to “reform and opening up” along Chinese lines, but he committed to staying in the six-nation talks.
But the United States and North Korea soon began arguing over how to implement the broadly worded agreement on denuclearization. In October 2006, barely a year after Mr. Hu’s visit, North Korea conducted its first nuclear test. The six-nation talks formally collapsed in 2009, when North Korea conducted its second test and launched a long-range rocket.
In 2010, Kim Jong-il, frail from a 2008 stroke, asked Mr. Hu to visit Pyongyang again so he could introduce his son Kim Jong-un, who had just debuted as heir apparent. Mr. Hu did not go, and Kim Jong-il died the next year.
Since then, the relationship between the Communist neighbors has turned colder. The North has tested four more nuclear weapons since 2009, as well as intercontinental ballistic missiles powerful enough to reach the mainland United States. China has joined the United States in imposing increasingly tough United Nations sanctions in response.
In Singapore last June, President Trump and Kim Jong-un signed a broadly worded denuclearization deal very similar to the one signed in September 2005. That deal, too, has since been thrown into doubt, as Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim met a second time in Vietnam but failed to agree on how to implement it.
China, whose role as a mediator has been largely assumed by South Korea, appears to see an opening to reclaim its prominence — and to use it as leverage in its own contentious talks with Washington, over trade. In a column published on Wednesday in North Korea’s main newspaper, Rodong Sinmun, Mr. Xi swore to make “an active contribution” to resolving the nuclear crisis.
But Mr. Xi will be risking more in Pyongyang than Mr. Hu did 14 years ago, said Shin Beom-chul, a North Korea expert at the Asan Institute for Policy Studies in Seoul.
“When Hu went there, North Korea had not conducted any nuclear tests,” Mr. Shin said. “By visiting North Korea when there has been no progress in denuclearization talks, Xi runs the risk of only strengthening Kim Jong-un’s position.”
