   A Hong Kong court has dealt a serious blow to same-sex marriage advocates in the region when it upheld a ban on such unions Friday. 
   The decision comes less than five months after Taiwan became the first place in Asia to allow unions between individuals of the same gender. 
   Hong Kong’s Court of First Instance ruled against a woman, known as MK, who’d claimed that the failure of the government to give her options for legally sharing her life with another woman violated her constitutional rights. 
   Judge Anderson Chow Ka-ming ruled against her, saying that current Hong Kong laws do not cover same-sex marriages, and that it would be “beyond the proper scope of the functions and powers of the court to change a social policy on a fundamental issue,” the South China Morning Post reported. 
   Ka-ming stated that “far-reaching consequences” could result from changing the definition of marriage to include same-sex couples, adding that the court is not prepared to do that. 
   The case got its start last year, when MK wanted to enter into a legally recognized relationship with her girlfriend, both of whom are permanent residents of Hong Kong. 
   Since marriage is defined as a union between two persons of different genders, in 2018 she filed a petition arguing that the lack of options for her and her girlfriend was unconstitutional. 
   In Friday’s ruling, the court stated that it wasn’t expressing views "on the associated social, moral and/or religious issues,” and that decision had been made strictly on legal grounds. 
   Amnesty International Hong Kong called the decision a “serious setback for equal marriage.” 
   Man-kei Tam, the organization’s director, released a statement Friday saying that “MK’s decision to challenge this discrimination in court was an opportunity for Hong Kong to break away from the injustices of the past and start shaping a more fair and equal society.” 
   “Sadly, the discriminatory treatment of same-sex couples will continue for the time being,” she added. 
   Ray Chan, an openly gay Hong Kong parliamentarian wrote on Twitter that he was “disappointed & disheartened” with the news. But added that, “There is a long road ahead and do not lose hope.” 
   A feeling shared by Man-kei Tam, who vowed that the disappointing ruling will “not dampen the fight for LGBTI rights.” 
   Same-sex relations were decriminalized in 1991 in Hong Kong, a former British Colony that returned to Chinese rule in 1997. 
   In June, 2018, researcher from the University of Hong Kong released the findings of a study on same-sex marriage acceptance, which showed that “support for the rights of same-sex couples has grown markedly over a short period.” 
   Half of the respondents backed allowing same-sex marriage, showing a jump of 12% for acceptance over a four-year period. 
   Last June, Hong Kong’s top court ruled in favor of a man who was seeking spousal and tax benefits for his husband, whom he had married in New Zealand. 
   In a unanimous decision, the court ruled that, even though the definition of marriage is between one man and one woman, it couldn’t be used to reject a claim to fundamental right. A decision who was characterized by Man-kei Tam at the time as a “huge step forward for equality in Hong Kong.”   
