   Revis Island is no more. 
   Former Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis announced his retirement from the NFL on Twitter Wednesday, bringing to end a storied 11-year career that included four All-Pro seasons and a Super Bowl ring with the 2014 Patriots. 
   “For the past 11 years, it has truly been an honor to showcase one of my greatest gifts to the world,” Revis wrote. “Today I am closing a chapter in my life that I once dreamed of as a kid and I am officially retiring from the National Football League. The game of football has opened doors for me I once thought were nearly impossible to get through. My passion to play the game at an elite level brought fun and excitement to the term ‘shutdown corner’ which was nearly on the verge of extinction. Covering some of the toughest assignments in league history was a challenge every Sunday, but also an honor within this game we all love. 
   “I would like to thank my coaches, teammates, and mentors who have made a significant impact in my life and helped to create amazing memories that my family and I will cherish for a lifetime. I’m excited as to what lies ahead as I pursue new ventures in different industries. Long live Revis Island.” 
   Revis, 33, emerged as one of the league’s elite corners over his first six seasons with Gang Green, which included four Pro-Bowl nods. In 2012, the Jets traded him to the Buccaneers for a one-year stint in Tampa Bay. After joining the rival Patriots for their Super Bowl campaign, Revis returned to the Jets for the 2015 season on a five-year deal with $39 million guaranteed. 
   But the team’s hopes of rekindling Revis’ ability as a shutdown defender proved unsuccessful. 
   The Jets cut him after the 2017 season, leading the Chiefs to ink him to a two-year deal before releasing him in February. He played in five games for Kansas City last season. 
   With 29 interceptions and 411 tackles to his name, Revis has closed the book on a career that will all but likely earn him a spot in the Pro Bowl Football of Fame.   
