Election in Indonesia’s Capital Could Test Ethnic and Religious Tolerance
JAKARTA, Indonesia — In one of the most contentious campaigns in the history of Indonesia’s young democracy, Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, the governor of Jakarta, is battling on two fronts: in the court of public opinion and in the court of law.
Mr. Basuki, an ethnic Chinese Christian who leads the capital of the world’s most populous predominantly Muslim country, is not only campaigning in the election on Wednesday but also defending himself against criminal charges of blasphemy against Islam.
He and his chief political ally, President Joko Widodo, have labeled his court case a conspiracy by “political actors” who aim to quash his re-election bid for one of the country’s most powerful offices. Some political analysts also called the court case, which they say violates a decades-old ban on using ethnicity and religion as a political weapon, a move by opponents of Mr. Joko to weaken the president in the prelude to his 2019 re-election bid.
A series of rallies in Jakarta late last year that drew hundreds of thousands of hard-line Islamists, including one in November that turned violent and left one dead and hundreds injured, have eroded Mr. Basuki’s once double-digit lead.
Mr. Basuki is only the second non-Muslim governor of Jakarta since Indonesia’s independence from the Netherlands in 1945. Wednesday’s election is viewed as a test of religious as well as ethnic tolerance in the country, which has more than 190 million Muslims among its population of 250 million, as well as influential religious minorities of Christians, Hindus and Buddhists.
“This has become a test of our young democracy,” said Philips J. Vermonte, who leads the politics and international relations department at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
“It’s actually the political elite that ignite this religious tension again and again,” Mr. Vermonte said, noting that religion and ethnicity were not campaign issues in the 100 other provincial- and district-level elections also taking place on Wednesday.
“In Jakarta, the national political elite have chosen to play this card, which is dangerous,” he said.
Mr. Basuki, known as Ahok, was charged with violating Indonesia’s anti-blasphemy law during a speech to fishermen in September, before the start of the campaign.
He had lightheartedly cited a verse in the Quran that warns Muslims against taking Christians and Jews as friends. He then said that, given Indonesia’s transition to democracy in the late 1990s, it would be acceptable for Muslims to cast ballots for a Christian.
At the opening of his trial in December, Mr. Basuki emphatically denied that this constituted blasphemy, arguing that his remark was aimed at “unscrupulous politicians” who he said were trying to use ethnicity and religion to undercut him.
If found guilty, he could face up to five years in prison.
Since the trial’s start, the governor has continued campaigning while appearing in court each Tuesday. Campaigning officially ended on Saturday for a mandatory three-day “cooling-off period,” a welcome respite given the political tensions.
Mr. Basuki, 50, formerly Jakarta’s deputy governor, took over as governor in 2014 from Mr. Joko, who was elected president. The grandson of a tin miner from Guangzhou, in southern China, Mr. Basuki is now trying to become Jakarta’s first directly elected Christian governor.
But his straightforward style, a contrast to that of many soft-speaking Javanese politicians, has also earned Mr. Basuki detractors, who call him brash and arrogant.
Even before the campaign, numerous ethnic and religious slurs were directed at Mr. Basuki, and dubious reports about him were shared on social media, including claims that he was a puppet of Beijing and that he was plotting to help China take over Indonesia.
The campaign has become so divisive, pitting those who admire Mr. Basuki’s can-do style against those who are convinced that he hates Islam, that it has strained friendships and led to screaming around dinner tables.
“It pulls so many negative threads together,” said Kevin Evans, a longtime Jakarta-based political observer. “It’s a reminder of the ‘otherness’ here.”
He added: “There’s this Islamist exclusiveness here. This kind of ‘Talibanization’ of the public domain.”
After decades of authoritarian rule, Indonesia built a relatively stable, tolerant democracy. Suharto, the army leader who seized power in the mid-1960s and ruled Indonesia for 32 years, signed a decree about three decades ago banning provocative political discourse on ethnicity, race and religion, an effort to maintain public order and racial and religious harmony.
That regulation was challenged in October, when the Indonesian Ulema Council, the country’s largest body of Islamic clerics, issued an edict declaring it “haram,” or forbidden, for Muslims to vote for a non-Muslim candidate. The edict is not legally binding, as Indonesia is not an Islamic state and it has a secular Constitution and government.
However, emboldened hard-line Islamist groups held the series of protests in Jakarta and other cities late last year, demanding that Mr. Basuki be jailed for blasphemy — or even lynched — including a demonstration in the capital in early November in which Muslim protesters set cars on fire and battled with riot police officers.
There was growing suspicion that the organizers of the protests had included Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Mr. Joko’s predecessor as president, whose son, Agus Yudhoyono, is also running for governor of Jakarta.
The elder Yudhoyono held two heated news conferences during the campaign, first to deny allegations that he was secretly financing the protests, and also to reject assertions by Mr. Basuki’s trial lawyers that he had requested the Indonesia Ulema Council to issue the fatwa prohibiting Muslims from voting for a Christian.
Regardless of who orchestrated the protests, they had the desired affect: Mr. Basuki’s once-comfortable double-digit lead all but vanished by December.
A series of recent polls suggest, however, that he has regained some lost ground, and he now has a lead of four to eight percentage points over his closest challenger, Anies Baswedan, a former minister of higher education. Agus Yudhoyono, who, like his father, is a former army officer, is third.
If none of the three candidates receives one vote more than 50 percent, and pollsters and analysts consider it unlikely any will, then the top two finishers will compete in a runoff election in April.
Based on current poll numbers, analysts say that Mr. Basuki would have a tougher time in a runoff against Mr. Anies, who is Muslim and emphasized his Islamic credentials on the campaign trail. They said a vast majority of Mr. Yudhoyono’s supporters would choose Mr. Anies in a runoff against Mr. Basuki.
“Conservative Islamic voters are strong in Jakarta, especially in south and east Jakarta,” said Burhanuddin Muhtadi, executive director of Indikator, a prominent Indonesian research and polling firm. “The conservative Islamic vote is clearly with Anies, so those who believe Ahok has committed blasphemy are clearly with Anies.”
