Israeli Labor Party Tries a New Leader  Gabbay, Self-Made Millionaire
JERUSALEM — Avi Gabbay, a relative novice in Israeli politics, spent his early years in an asbestos hut in a transit camp, one of eight children of Moroccan immigrants, then became a millionaire. On Monday, he also became the chairman of the center-left Labor Party, beating Amir Peretz, a Moroccan-born party veteran, in a runoff.
Mr. Gabbay’s victory is not likely to pose an imminent threat to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of the conservative Likud Party, now serving his third consecutive term in office. The Labor Party has not won a general election in 18 years. Currently leading the parliamentary opposition, the party has been polling third after Likud and the centrist Yesh Atid party in recent months.
But the extraordinary rise of Mr. Gabbay, 50, is expected to breathe new life into the historic but diminished Labor movement. Having dominated politics here for almost three decades after Israel’s establishment in 1948, it was the political home of state builders like David Ben-Gurion, Golda Meir, Shimon Peres and Yitzhak Rabin.
The latest leadership race riveted many Israelis as it pitted old politics against new, and liberal forces against a deeply conservative government and a public that has been shifting rightward.
Tal Schneider, an independent Israeli political blogger, described the result as a “dramatic change” for the Labor Party. About 52,000 people were eligible to cast ballots, and, she said, “They chose someone totally new and somewhat unfamiliar to the public and the voters.”
Ehud Barak, a former Labor leader, prime minister and military chief of staff who strongly endorsed Mr. Gabbay and seems poised for a political comeback of his own, described Mr. Gabbay’s win as a “revolution in Labor.” Mr. Barak added that Mr. Netanyahu and his allies would be “sweating tonight, with good reason.”
Isaac Herzog, the departing Labor chairman who won the party 24 seats in the last election to the Likud’s 30, was knocked out last week in a first round of voting. Some in the party have described the shake-up as “electrifying.”
Mr. Gabbay’s path to the Labor leadership has been unorthodox. Growing up in a Jerusalem transit camp, he was identified at a young age as a gifted student and was sent to school in an affluent neighborhood of the city. His father was a technician.
He studied economics and business administration at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, served in the budget division of the Ministry of Finance and then went into business and rose to become the chief executive of Bezeq, Israel’s telecommunications monopoly, a post he held until 2013. He has been unapologetic about his earnings there of millions of dollars.
He then helped Moshe Kahlon, a former Likud minister, build Kulanu, a new center-right party that joined Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition after the 2015 elections. Mr. Gabbay became the minister for environmental protection, but he quit after a year, saying that he did not like what he saw in government and that Mr. Netanyahu’s decision to replace his defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, with the ultranationalist Avigdor Lieberman as part of a political deal was too much to swallow.
Mr. Gabbay joined Labor about six months ago.
Addressing a hall filled with cheering supporters at 11 p.m. shortly after the results were in, Mr. Gabby said, “To all those who rushed to eulogize the Labor Party as an alternative for the government, and to all those who thought the Israeli citizens had lost hope in change, to all those — tonight is the answer.”
“Tomorrow we will begin the journey to the hearts of good Israelis,” he added. “Israelis who believe in our ideology and values, but Israelis who, for decades, have not voted Labor.”
Mr. Gabbay and Mr. Peretz, 65, from the immigrant town of Sderot near the border with the Gaza Strip, are both Mizrahi, or Eastern, Jews of Moroccan descent, and their leadership contest brought to the fore the debate over Israel’s identity and ethnic politics. Labor has always been identified with the old Ashkenazic elite who hailed from Europe.
This is not the first time a Mizrahi, or Sephardic, Jew has headed the Labor Party. Mr. Peretz led it for a period in the past, as did Benjamin Ben-Eliezer, an Iraqi-born politician. Both Mr. Peretz and Mr. Ben-Eliezer were also defense ministers.
Mizrahi Jews, who immigrated mostly in the 1950s, were resentful of the sometimes highhanded treatment by the Labor establishment, so many have traditionally voted for Likud or other right-wing or religious parties. Though Mizrahim make up roughly half of Israel’s Jewish population, and about a third of Israeli children are now born into mixed Mizrahi/Ashkenazic families, economic and educational gaps remain.
Despite hopes in Labor that Mr. Gabbay will be able to bring in new voters from sectors of the public that have long shunned the party, Mitchell Barak, an Israeli pollster and political commentator, said his surveys over the years showed that the Mizrahim consistently preferred Ashkenazic candidates for prime minister.
“There has not yet been a Sephardi prime minister,” Mr. Barak said, “and I don’t see one on the horizon.”
The next elections are scheduled for late 2019, though many Israeli governments do not last their full four-year terms.
Ron Cahlili, a Mizrahi documentary director and left-wing activist, said in a radio interview this week: “The role of a Mizrahi leader is not to be Mizrahi and to say I’m Mizrahi and I live in Sderot. The role of a Mizrahi leader is to reduce gaps between Mizrahim and Ashkenazim. Period.”
