Former Philippine President Faces Criminal Charges Over Botched Raid
MANILA — The official in charge of prosecuting government misdeeds in the Philippines on Friday ordered that criminal charges be filed against former President Benigno S. Aquino III for a botched assault in 2015 on a Muslim rebel camp that left 44 police commandos dead.
The official, Conchita Carpio Morales, the ombudsman of the Philippines, said there was probable cause to charge Mr. Aquino, his police chief and the head of the commando unit that carried out the operation. The attack caused the president’s popularity to sink and also derailed peace talks with Muslim insurgents.
Relatives of the dead officers accused Mr. Aquino and the officials of “criminal negligence,” saying that they had approved the operation despite knowing that the police chief, Alan Purisima, had been suspended in an unrelated corruption case.
Mr. Purisima appeared to have been allowed to participate and run the operation under Mr. Aquino’s oversight, “thereby giving pseudo legal power to a suspended official,” Ms. Morales said.
The operation, code-named Oplan Exodus, began without the knowledge of other security officials; only Mr. Aquino and two police officials were aware of the plan. About 400 highly trained police commandos took part in the attack, in the southern town of Mamasapano in an area controlled by guerrillas from the Moro Islamic Liberation Front.
Cellphone messages between Mr. Aquino and Mr. Purisima, longtime associates, showed that Mr. Purisima “played a major role in the botched operation” despite his suspension, according to a filing in the case by Ms. Morales’s office.
“The fact remains that, at the time, particularly before and during the actual implementation of Oplan Exodus, Purisima was under preventive suspension, and that Purisima, despite being under preventive suspension, indeed played an active role in Oplan Exodus,” the filing said.
The officers who carried out the operation managed to neutralize their target — Zulkifli bin Hir, also called Marwan, a top Malaysian bomb maker wanted for a string of attacks in the region. The United States government had offered a $5 million reward for his capture or killing.
But the firefight lasted for several hours and killed 44 commandos, making the day one of the deadliest ever for government forces.
Top insurgent commanders later testified in a Senate investigation into the raid and said the fighting could have been averted. A landmark peace deal in 2014 called for cooperation in counterterrorism operations, especially in areas where the Moro rebels hold sway.
If found guilty, Mr. Aquino could be jailed for up to six years.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Aquino, Abigail Valte, said on Friday that he was studying the order for a possible appeal.
She said, however, that an initial reading of the case suggested a “misappreciation of some facts” in the operation.
“He will ask to clarify the same through a motion for reconsideration,” Ms. Valte said.
