A Cold War Summit Offers Lessons for Trump Before Putin Meeting
A new president inexperienced in the intricacies of superpower politics meets his Russian rival for the first time. There are disputes over Crimea, nuclear weapons and completely different conceptions of an acceptable status quo as Washington and Moscow vie for global influence. The Americans arrive with an unclear agenda; the Russians have a very clear one.
While it sounds like the coming encounter between President Trump and the current Russian leader, Vladimir V. Putin — scheduled for Friday — this actually was a description of President John F. Kennedy’s first face-to-face session with Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev of the Soviet Union in June 1961.
“You know, Mr. Kennedy, we voted for you,” Khrushchev said, as he recalled in his 1970 memoir. It is a line that, if one believes American intelligence reports, Mr. Putin could repeat, but probably will not.
But it is the other lessons of that meeting in Vienna — which stretched over two days, three meals, a clumsy effort by Khrushchev to charm Jackie Kennedy and a tough one to threaten her husband — that might be useful to the Trump White House. It was one of the most remarkable leader-to-leader encounters of the Cold War, a story of caution about the dangers of walking into such a session without clear strategic goals.
Minutes after the meeting was over, Kennedy told James Reston of The New York Times that it had been an incredibly rough session, for which he had been ill-prepared.
“Worst thing in my life,” Kennedy said, according to later histories of the event. “He savaged me.” (Mr. Reston, perhaps protecting the background nature of the conversation even long after Kennedy’s death, did not quote the conversation directly in his memoir, “Deadline.”)
Mr. Reston expressed surprise that the young president came out of the meeting — then, as now, in a time of deteriorating relations with Moscow — determined to show his toughness, someplace. “And the place to do it, he remarked to my astonishment, was Vietnam!” Mr. Reston recalled.
How much of this history is known to Mr. Trump and his aides is a mystery. Both Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, the president’s national security adviser, and Stephen K. Bannon, one of Mr. Trump’s closest political advisers, are steeped in both ancient and American history — and General McMaster wrote a book about the flawed decision-making in Washington over the war in Vietnam.
Still, General McMaster sent a bit of a shiver through Washington last week when he said that the meeting with Mr. Putin on Friday had “no specific agenda.” He added, “It’s whatever the president wants to talk about.”
Historians who have focused on the Kennedy-Khrushchev interaction say the lesson of the encounter is that having no agenda is a bad idea.
The presidential historian Michael Beschloss, who has written extensively on the meeting, said that one lesson from the Vienna encounter “is that when two leaders of important world powers have their first meeting as heads of state, the results can be very dangerous unless the agenda has been carefully planned by both sides, and unless each leader has a number of experienced officials in the room who are a significant part of the discussions.”
There are differences, to be sure.
Kennedy entered the meeting as a hawk, after warning of a nonexistent “missile gap” between the United States and the Soviet Union. Mr. Trump enters after more than a year in which he has never had an unkind word to say about Mr. Putin, or his authoritarian rule — and has disputed the accounts of American intelligence officials who say the evidence is beyond doubt that Mr. Putin himself ordered the meddling in the American election.
Kennedy did start with a theme that it is easy to imagine Mr. Trump adopting: that the United States and its adversary have to understand each other’s views. But one of the many heated debates between Kennedy and Khrushchev was over the question of meddling in the affairs of other countries.
According to Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian who was given notes of the meeting for his book “A Thousand Days,” the two leaders argued about which one spent more time manipulating elections and other leaders.
“How could we work anything out when the United States regarded revolution anywhere as the result of Communist machinations?” Khrushchev was paraphrased as telling the president. “It was really the United States which caused revolution by backing reactionary governments,” he said in comments that Kennedy took as part warning, part lecture.
In response, Kennedy noted Khrushchev’s pledge to back wars of national liberation — something the Soviet Union, like Russia today, attempted through tools including the kinds of “information operations” conducted more recently in the United States and Europe. That was the beginning of a lengthy, often ideological debate. The gruff Kremlin leader believed the United States was out to humiliate the Soviet Union and to contain Communist power. Each viewed the other as the aggressor.
“I want peace,” Mr. Schlesinger quoted Khrushchev as saying, “but if you want war, that is your problem.”
Kennedy responded, “It is you, and not I, who wants to force change.” The two men then got into a spat about the Western protection of Berlin, and the benefits of capitalism versus Communism.
Mr. Trump’s past comments suggest that he is unlikely to engage in similar discussion. Neither he nor Mr. Putin wants to waste much time on ideological debate. Mr. Trump has expressed doubt that Russia is trying to settle old scores in the region, or restore its past influence.
And in an interview that Mr. Trump gave to The New York Times last year, when he was a presidential candidate, he said he was not especially inclined to continue sanctions over Russian activity to destabilize Ukraine, or its seizure of Crimea. In fact, the White House has been looking to weaken sanctions against Moscow.
One of the big questions is whether Mr. Trump will press for the return of Crimea to Ukraine and an end to Russian activity to destabilize the Ukrainian government — regular talking points for the past several years. And Mr. Trump and his secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson, seem unlikely to press Russia on its military support of the Syrian government.
What that 1961 summit meeting was really about, of course, was each man taking the other’s measure — and this one will be, too. Khrushchev was uncertain whether Kennedy “intended to be more belligerent toward the Soviet Union than Eisenhower had been, or not,” Mr. Beschloss said. “Kennedy studied for it but went in with excessive faith in his ability to think on his feet.”
Mr. Trump clearly shares that self-confidence. And no one should expect Mr. Trump to declare that he was savaged, or to admit that the meeting went badly, even if it turns out that way. After all, Mr. Trump always talks about his ability to make a deal.
