52 Places to Go  How Perth and Northern Rivers Made the List
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau chief. Sign up to get it by email.
___
Every year, The New York Times publishes a list of 52 Places to Go — a massive guide to great getaways all over the world.
Last year’s edition included Tasmania, the area around Darwin, and Fiji.
This year’s 52 also includes a few places in the region — Paparoa Track, New Zealand, and Tahiti — and two locations in Australia: The Northern Rivers region of New South Wales, and Perth.
Many of you may be wondering how these places get chosen. Anyone who lives near Perth and the Northern Rivers (where officials were thrilled to have been picked) are no doubt curious as well.
So here’s a bit of the back story.
Every year, in September or October, editors for the Travel section email correspondents and trusted writers, asking for suggestions. Many of us send along more ideas than they’ll ever choose — a mix of places we’ve grown to love, and those that might have something new or interesting to offer.
And sometimes, we also send the editors to people who might know more than we do.
That’s what happened this year. Both Australian selections came to us through Besha Rodell, our Australian food columnist, who travels the country looking for great food and hidden gems.
They are far from the only places worth recommending (I’m partial to South Australia’s remote coastline) but they were clearly places that piqued the interest of our Travel editors in New York.
They had to beat out quite a few others.
Our ideas joined dozens of others for a marathon set of meetings in which the winning locations were chosen by a team of editors led by Amy Virshup, who became the Travel editor in October.
Along the way, there were arguments. There were changes. There are still some selections that just missed the cut and may never get another shot.
What the editors looked for varies.
As Amy explained in a recent Times Insider piece, there is always an effort to find places that have a reason to go NOW, in 2019.
But there are other criteria, too. This year, for example, Amy said she prioritized places that were being threatened by climate change, to make a point that the world is changing and you better get going before some of these wonders disappear.
Also, she added, “History matters, and there are places that earned spots on our list because they are marking major milestones in interesting ways.”
Other key factors included what’s happening culturally or in nature that might make a destination particularly interesting this year, and the editors also looked for spots that might offer new alternatives to old favorites.
Perth and the Northern Rivers match a few of these qualifications. Perth has new attractions; Northern Rivers has a new, boho food scene — and both are alternatives to Sydney and Melbourne.
They are also simply beautiful and unique places that the rest of the world should know more about.
This year’s 52 Places ought to help.
And one more thing. In case you’re wondering, Perth is no less beloved because it shows up at 43 while Northern Rivers landed at 29. I sent Amy an email asking about that and she assured me that the order wasn’t a ranking of quality.
“Other than #1, it is not meant to be in rank of favorite to least favorite,” she said. “It’s about getting a good mix of visuals, themes and geography. We like #5 and #50 equally!”
Now for this week’s news and help-me-understand-the-world roundup. Join us in our Facebook group for more discussion and share this newsletter if you get the urge — here’s how to sign up.
Happy travels, all.
___
To help you REALLY appreciate those amazing 52 places, here’s a little of what’s going on elsewhere in the world.
England: Beware of the giant fatberg of wet wipes, grease and grime in Sidmouth.
Pakistan: The dancing girls of Lahore used to shimmy for royalty; now it’s just leering men.
Sub-Saharan Africa:  Rift Valley fever is a virus that’s even more dangerous than Zika to pregnant women.
China:  The mass detention of Uighur artists, journalists and scholars has become an alarming symbol of the Communist Party’s most intense social-engineering drive in decades.
___
Ready for something lighter? How about celebrities on the red carpet at the Golden Globes?
If you miss the awards show and want to catch up, don’t miss our writers’ best and the worst of the gala, from the most shocking win to the least stuffy presenters.
___
I’ve started meditating with my daughter to help her fall asleep and I can’t help but find it remarkably soothing.
Farhad Manjoo goes even further in his debut Opinion column (having moved from Tech), arguing that it has helped him disconnect with the ways that digital existence scrambles the brain.
“I can better distinguish what’s important from what’s trivial, and I’m more gracious and empathetic with others online,” he writes. “As far as I know, people are still wrong on the internet, but, amazingly, I don’t really care anymore.
___
We’re getting back into the swing of things. Sort of.
• Asian-Australian Actors, Overlooked at Home, Flourish in Hollywood: Chris Pang, Jordan Rodrigues and Natasha Liu Bordizzo returned to Australia for a break, discussing how they are seizing opportunities in Hollywood after “Crazy Rich Asians” became a hit.
• Suspicious Packages Are Delivered to Multiple Foreign Consulates in Australia: The consulates of several countries were evacuated in Melbourne and Canberra after receiving what the authorities described as potentially “hazardous material.”
• Saudi Woman Who Fled Family Is Granted Refugee Status: The ruling by the United Nations clears the way for an asylum request by Rahaf Mohammed Alqunun, who had hoped to go to Australia.
• Australian Jellyfish Swarm Stings Thousands, Forcing Beach Closings: Bluebottle jellyfish are normally found far from shore, but they have been descending on Australia’s east coast in what officials called a “relentless” assault.
___
• Gail Collins tries to find the bright side of President Trump’s obsession with a border wall.
• Bari Weiss tells Americans what they could learn from Australia’s laid back summer ways. While she was here, she also tried to keep up with the country’s fastest 92-year-old woman.
• Tina Rosenberg has a solution to share: In Australia, China and elsewhere, scientists are fighting disease-carrying mosquitoes by introducing another type, carrying just a harmless form of bacteria.
___
Do your possessions spark joy?
Last week’s newsletter included our monthly Netflix guide and since then, my wife and I have been pleasantly surprised by “Tidying Up with Marie Kondo,” a reality series in which the adorable Japanese lifestyle guru visits the cluttered homes of American families, and helps them find a way back to balance and organization.
Sounds weird to rave about a cleanup show, I know, but it manages to be both useful and emotional — definitely more compelling than we expected.
While we’re at it, here’s an article explaining why clutter is so stressful. Purge, people, purge!
