   A teenager cracked an egg over the head of a Muslim-bashing senator who blamed Friday’s New Zealand mosque massacres on immigrants, and the Australian prime minister did not disapprove. 
   The Australian Prime Minister appeared to side on Monday with a 17-year-old boy who egged a Muslim-bashing senator in the head. The fully grown politician rewarded the youth with a solid punch to the face, and then some. 
   “The full force of the law should be applied to Sen. Anning,” Prime Minister Scott Morrison said after 17-year-old boy, holding his phone to record the deed, smashed a raw egg on the bald head of Sen. Fraser Anning as he appeared to imply that the victims in Friday’s mosque massacres were somehow responsible for their fate. 
   The senator had to be restrained after he clocked the teen, who was also pulled away when he tried to fight back. Police told the Associated Press that they were investigating everything about the episode, from the teen’s actions to the politician’s. 
   “The incident is being actively investigated by Victoria Police in its entirety,” police said in a statement to the newswire. 
   Anning had already received severe blowback for tweets such as, “Does anyone still dispute the link between Muslim immigration and violence?” in the wake of the mass shooting at two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand on Friday that left 50 people dead and at least three dozen hospitalized, including children. 
   "The real cause of the bloodshed on New Zealand streets today is the immigration program which allowed Muslim fanatics to migrate to New Zealand in the first place," Anning said in a statement quoted by AP. 
   In fact it was a self-professed white supremacist fanatic who carried out the crime. A 28-year-old Australian national, Brenton Harrison Tarrant, was charged with the premeditated killings, which he wrought during Friday prayers. 
   New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, who called Friday one of the “darkest days” in the country’s history, said of Anning’s remarks, “They’re a disgrace,” reported NBC News. 
   Meanwhile the teen, who has dubbed himself “Egg Boy” online, has received a rush of support, with a GoFundMe page far exceeding its goal. The money is earmarked for massacre victims, according to NBC News. 
   As for Anning, Morrison soundly denounced the senator’s comments. 
   “In his conflation of this horrendous terrorist attack with issues of immigration, in his attack on Islamic faith specifically — these comments are appalling and they're ugly and they have no place in Australia, in the Australian Parliament,” Morrison said, according to AP. “He should be, frankly, ashamed of himself.”   
