   Motorcycle clubs and street gangs across New Zealand are rallying around the Muslim community, vowing to stand guard and provide extra security one week after a gunman opened fire inside two different mosques during Friday prayers. 
   The Mongrel Mob, Black Power, King Cobras and Hells Angels have all promised to provide protection at mosques in Christchurch and beyond so that worshipers may gather without worry for Jummah or Friday prayers. 
   “We will support and assist our Muslim brothers and sisters for however long they need us,” Sonny Fatu, president of the Mongrel Mob’s Waikato chapter, told the New Zealand news outlet, Stuff. 
   “We will not be armed. We are peacefully securing the inner gated perimeter, with other community members to allow them to feel at ease.” 
   Waikato Muslim Association President Asad Moshin expressed his gratitude to the biker group and the community for their support in wake of the mass shootings, saying, “It gives us strength to overcome the grief we are undoing.” But Moshin added local worshipers do not fear an attack like the one in Christchurch and instead invited their volunteer guards to come inside and join them in prayer. 
   “There are no fears, and we are not scared,” he told the New Zealand Herald. “They don’t have to stand outside the mosque, they can come inside, right behind where the sermon is given.” 
   Dozens of worshipers were gathered inside the Al Noor mosque in Christchurch last week when a gunman — with a camera strapped to his head set to the record the terror — unleashed a hail of gunfire, killing 41 people. From there, authorities said the shooter drove several miles across the city and opened fire again inside a mosque in Linwood, killing seven more people. Another two people died at area hospitals from their wounds, bringing the total number of fatalities to 50. 
   Authorities later arrested Brenton Tarrant, a 28-year-old Australia native, who published a manifesto rife with anti-Muslim and white supremacist rhetoric ahead of the attacks. He was charged with one count of first-degree murder and officials expect he will face additional charges in the future. 
   A day after the shooting, the Australian Mongrel Mob gang offered their presence outside a mosque in Sydney while the Black Power bikers performed a traditional haka outside the Al Noor mosque to show their support. 
   The deadly terrorist attack left New Zealand reeling and prompted almost instant change in the nation’s gun laws. 
   Just six days after the mosque massacres, New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced an immediate ban Thursday on the sales of “military-style” semiautomatic firearms and high-capacity magazines. 
   She noted gun owners can hand over their firearms under amnesty while officials develop a formal buyback scheme, which could cost New Zealand up to $140 million.   
