Christchurch mosques slowly reopening following deadly attacks
   Christchurch’s Al-Noor mosque is slowly reopening its doors, following the deadly attack it sustained just a week before. 
   The New Zealand city made international headlines on March 15, when 50 people, many of whom were worshipers, were murdered at Al-Noor and the Linwood Islamic Centre. The massacre was orchestrated and carried out by a 28-year-old Australian man named Brenton Tarrant, who identifies as a white supremacist. 
   Following the attacks, Al-Noor was closed to the public, including worshipers, until Saturday when BBC News reports, small groups were granted entry. Armed police remained on site during this time. 
   The initiative to reopen the mosque — albeit not entirely — led to a “march for love.” Around 3,000 walked through the city in an effort to pay tribute to the victims of the attacks. There were many people who were silent during the walk, others carried signs calling for peace and opposing racism. 
   Manaia Butler, 16, a student who helped to plan the march said, “We feel like hate has brought a lot of darkness at times. Love is the strongest cure to light the city out of that darkness.” 
   One father, Aden Diriye, whose 3-year-old toddler was killed in the shootings, made a point of going to Al-Noor on Saturday. After he completed his prayers, he said, “I am very happy. I was back as soon as we rebuilt, to pray.” 
   “We are allowing 15 people at a time, just to get some normality,” Saiyad Hassen, a volunteer at Al-Noor, explained to AFP news agency. 
   It has not been announced when the mosque will reopen entirely. 
   In the week since the attacks, Al-Noor’s walls have been repainted and the bullet holes have been filled in, though the floor appears empty because of the now missing rugs. This led to worshipers praying on a makeshift rug instead. 
   According to authorities, the Linwood mosque has reopened as well. 
   Jacinda Ardern, the country’s prime minister, announced Thursday that all types of semiautomatic weapons will now be banned. The new legislation is thought to take effect by April 11. “Our history changed forever,” she explained, “Now, our laws will too.” 
   According to Ardern, there will be a national memorial service planned for victims for next week.   
