Fuming President Trump demands Fox News stand behind race-baiting anchors Jeanine Pirro and Tucker Carlson
   Fox News appears to have taken a stand against hate speech — and President Trump does not like it one bit. 
   Trump went on a Twitter rant Sunday morning to protest his network of choice’s decision not to run a new episode of “Justice with Judge Jeanine” Saturday night, a week after host Jeanine Pirro made a comment about Muslims that many found offensive. 
   “Bring back @JudgeJeanine Pirro,” Trump demanded in his multi-tweet screed. 
   Last week, Pirro condemned Minn. Rep. Ilhan Omar for wearing a traditional Muslim headdress. Her Saturday night program was replaced with a rerun of an unrelated docu-series. 
   “Is her adherence to this Islamic doctrine indicative of her adherence to Sharia law, which in itself is antithetical to the United States Constitution?” Pirro asked her ultra-conservative audience. The President has been a coddled guest on Pirro’s show. 
   Fox quickly condemned Pirro’s comments and claimed to have spoken with her directly, but declined to speak on “internal scheduling matters,” according to multiple outlets including Variety, which reported listings had been placed in newspapers indicating Pirro’s show would air as scheduled. 
   In his Twitter rant, the President contended that Fox News had caved under pressure from mainstream news networks that are in cahoots with the “Radical Left Democrats.” 
   “They have all out campaigns against @Fox News hosts who are doing too well,” the President’s Twitter rant continued. 
   Pirro also came under fire in November when she and fellow Fox News star Sean Hannity joined the President on the campaign trail in Missouri, where the latter was billed as a “special guest” at a midterm election rally for a Republican candidate. Hannity used the opportunity to publicly condemn objective reporters covering that partisan event as “fake news.” 
   Trump urged his friends at Fox News to stand behind their embattled big-ticket reporters, including Tucker Carlson, who came under fire last week for recordings unearthed by Media Matters  in which he degraded women and referred to Iraqis as “semi-literate primitive monkeys.” 
   “Keep fighting for Tucker, and fight hard for @JudgeJeanine. Your competitors are jealous — they all want what you’ve got — NUMBER ONE. Don’t hand it to them on a silver platter,” Trump tweeted Sunday morning. 
   Trump also went after Fox News anchors Artel Neville and Leland Vittert, who apparently haven’t been meeting the President’s standards for journalism. 
   “Were @FoxNews weekend anchors, @ArthelNeville and @LelandVittert, trained by CNN prior to their ratings collapse?” he also tweeted Sunday. “In any event, that’s where they should be working, along with their lowest rated anchor, Shepard Smith!” 
   That condemnation could be a blessing for Fox News, which strives to separate the far-right antics of its primetime stars from the reporting of less bombastic correspondents like Smith and Chris Wallace. 
   When the Democratic National Committee announced earlier this month that it wouldn’t allow Fox News access to the DNC debates, Fox said in a statement “We hope the DNC will reconsider its decision to bar Chris Wallace, Bret Baier and Martha MacCallum, all of whom embody the ultimate journalistic integrity and professionalism, from moderating a Democratic presidential debate.” 
   The President was criticized this week for being less boisterous about a terror attack in New Zealand that left 50 Muslims dead in mosques where they were worshiping Friday. 
   “My warmest sympathy and best wishes goes out to the people of New Zealand after the horrible massacre in the Mosques,” the President tweeted after a white supremacist — who praised Trump in a racist 74-page manifesto — marched into two mosques and killed Muslims, seemingly at random. White House officials further condemned the attack and stated support for the people of New Zealand. 
   The Commander in Chief quickly stole headlines after the New Zealand massacre by saying he didn’t think white supremacy was on the rise, despite a new report from the Anti-Defamation League saying otherwise. 
   “I don’t really,” he said. “It's a small group of people that have very, very serious problems.” 
   Trump, who frequently refers to reporters as the “enemy of the people,” has similarly painted Islam as a national threat. 
   “I think Islam hates us — there’s a tremendous hatred there,” he told CNN in 2016, arguing the U.S. had to be careful about letting Muslims into the country. 
   Saturday was a tough TV night for the President. He also went on Twitter Sunday to complain “Saturday Night Live” had broadcast a rerun of an episode that mocked him in a “It’s a Wonderful Life” parody. 
   “It’s truly incredible that shows like Saturday Night Live, not funny/no talent, can spend all of their time knocking the same person (me), over & over, without so much of a mention of 'the other side,’” Trump tweeted. “Like an advertisement without consequences.”   
