Suspect in New Zealand mosque mass shootings sent manifesto to prime minister's office nine minutes before attacks
   The suspect in the mass shooting in New Zealand that left 50 people dead at two mosques sent his deranged anti-immigrant manifesto to the prime minister's office nine minutes before the attacks. 
   Brenton Tarrant had also posted his jumbled 74-page document online before broadcasting live video of the massacre. 
   Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said the gunman sent the manifesto to her office email before Friday's attack, although she did not receive it herself. There were about 30 recipients, she said, and the email was forwarded to parliamentary security within a couple of minutes. 
   Seventeen minutes of the rampage at the Al Noor mosque in Christchurch were livestreamed as social media sites scrambled to take down the video. The second attack took place at the Linwood mosque about 3 miles away. 
   Tarrant's manifesto praised mass killers such as South Carolina church shooter Dylann Roof and Norwegian gunman Anders Breivik, and it said President Trump was an inspiration. 
   The suspected killer’s grandmother Marie Fitzgerald told 9News in Australia that he seemed fine when he attended his sister's birthday party in Grafton, New Zealand, about a year ago. 
   “He was just his normal self, you know,” she said. 
   Fitzgerald said that the death of Tarrant's father in 2010 impacted him greatly, and that he “changed completely” after traveling to Europe. 
   “We are so sorry for the families for the dead and the injured,” she told News9. “I can’t think nothing else, just shattered is the word.” 
   Authorities say 42 people were killed at the Al Noor mosque and seven more were fatally shot at Linwood, with one person later passing away at Christchurch Hospital. An additional 34 people were hospitalized there, including 12 in critical condition. A 4-year-old girl was in critical condition at another hospital. 
   Relatives remained unsure when they would be able to bury their loved ones — Islamic law calls for bodies to be cleansed and buried as soon as possible after death. 
   “We have to be absolutely clear on the cause of death and confirm their identity before that can happen,” Police Commissioner Mike Bush said. “But we are so aware of the cultural and religious needs. So we are doing that as quickly and as sensitively as possible.” 
   Ardern said a small number of bodies would start being released to families on Sunday evening. Cops have released a preliminary list of the victims to families. 
   “The family understands that it's a crime scene,” said Javed Dadabhai, whose cousin Junaid Mortara was killed. “It's going to be a criminal charge against the guy who's done this, so they need to be pretty thorough.” 
   With News Wire Services   
