Readers sound off on bigotry, admissions cheating and abortion
   South Strabane Township, Pa.: It is ironic that on the day that the President appropriately voiced a few words of concern and disapproval of the mosque slaughters in New Zealand, he vetoed legislation that would nix his “national emergency” on our border with Mexico, claiming that there is an “invasion” of our country by those whom he considers undesirables. 
   Many clerics will tell us that the language of hate — the push by those in authority to scapegoat and banish certain individuals from our midst — foments a climate in which atrocities such as the New Zealand slaughter can occur. It should be noted that in his manifesto, the killer praised the President as “a symbol of renewed white identity.” The savage creature who slaughtered 11 fine people peacefully at worship at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh did so out of contempt for immigrants who have been aided by a Jewish organization which is engaged in heroic work. 
   Early in his term, the President sought to ban individuals form certain countries from immigrating to the United States “until we can figure out what the hell is going on.” Before he recognized that it would hamper his efforts to exclude these individuals, he specifically called for a ban on Muslims and wished for there to be an unprecedented Muslim registry. It is curious that his purported desire to keep us safe, to engage in a war on terrorism, provided for no exclusion of individuals from Saudi Arabia, the country from which most of the Sept. 11 murderers emanated. 
   We have seen throughout history the danger of leaders engaging in scapegoating, throwing the baby out with the bathwater, subjecting the honorable adherents to certain religions to persecution. Those who fail to learn from history are condemned to repeat it. Oren Spiegler 
   Moses Lake, Wash.: I am a long-time subscriber to the Daily News, but I have to gripe about you showing the face of the New Zealand shooter. You should have done what other organizations have done — pixelate his face or not show it at all, as the low-life wanted fame for his horrible act. See how easy it was for me to not even mention his name? Let him rot in anonymity. Rod Henry 
   Sebastian, Fla.: In response to the letters criticizing Voicer Carol Yost for her anti-Israel letter supporting the Palestinians, imploring her to learn history and that you can’t change the facts, shame on you. Haven’t you heard of alternative facts? The truth isn’t the truth? The truth is subjective? Or even my favorite, the truth doesn’t matter? If you want to criticize me for saying what I just said, I’ll just do what Diaper Don would do, despite there being a record of me saying it. I’ll just deny I ever said it. Hal Lichtman 
   Manhattan: Re “About those taxes” (editorial, March 11): Put aside the stink of grift and conflict of interest emanating from the White House. Given that the Trump-signed federal tax law targets middle-class New Yorkers for maximum pain, you’d think the (now Democratic) legislative leadership in Albany would be chomping at the bit to pass a bill that would release five years of Trump’s state tax returns, so we can find out if he stands to benefit tax-wise on our backs. You would be wrong; the bill remains stuck in committee. Following your editorial, I contacted the offices of Assembly Speaker Carl Heastie, Senate Majority Leader Andrea Stewart-Cousins and the committee chairs. No one will commit to ever bringing it to a vote. Andrea Weiss 
   South Wellfleet, Mass.: Those recently caught up in the college admissions cheating scandal and now facing federal charges aren’t all that different from the rest of us, aside from being rich and/or famous along with also being five-star examples of this adage: “The bigger they are, the harder they fall.” Tim-ber! Mike Rice 
   Bergenfield, N.J.: The wealthy class bribing their kids into top schools, what a surprise! Thanks to Ronald Reagan and traitor Bill Bradley relieving them of that nasty 70% tax bracket they have money to buy the government and everything else. Al Schwarzler 
   Spotswood, N.J.: The Daily News once printed the most powerful article I have ever read. It was a column about late-term abortions by Richard Cohen, a lifelong Democrat and accomplished writer. His description of this horrible procedure was incredibly gory and graphic. He said that future generations will look back at us and ask why we let this barbaric violence against a defenseless baby take place. They will ask why we made it legal and allowed it to happen? He said it is a procedure that Nazis would be proud of. I wonder how many people reading this have seen a video of an abortion? It is probably too gruesome to even watch. Maybe they will read this article instead? I really hope you will reprint this article for all to read. It is my hope that we will all agree that this cruelty should never be allowed to happen to any human being. Tom Scott 
   Manhattan: The Democrats in Congress are boors. Accepted hospitality calls for guests in your home to be treated with courtesy and respect. The disrespect they showed by snubbing President Trump when invited into their home to give his State of the Union Address was horrible and disgusting. Their all-consuming and irrational hatred of him just showed them to be completely lacking in manners. Not one is fit to hold the trust that put them in office. Joseph McCluskey 
   Elmurst, L.I.: Mayor de Blasio’s plan to save the city from the rising ocean level due to global warming is all wet. He plans to build a sea wall that will protect Manhattan while the rest of the boroughs tread water. His plan is to build a partial sea wall that will include housing. It will only be 500 feet long. How much protection does that really afford? Moreover, how many of New Yorks’ affluent will be privy to access to it and at what cost? I realize that due to the failure of the Amazon project his presidential aspirations went down the tubes and this project seems to be his only hope of keeping his head above water. James League 
   Staten Island: To Voicer Sarah Alboher: There’s a great phone app called Hiya that allows you to screen, block etc. unsolicited phone intrusions in your day... and it’s free! I now love it when one of these pests, scammers etc. call because I hit the “screen” option and the caller gets a message informing them that this call is being screened through a Google service and to state their name and reason for calling! Ninety-nine percent of the time they immediately hang up. It’s great! I love it! Janet Baker 
   Old Bridge, N.J.: In the case of the Gowanus Lamb Caper, there should be a warrant out for the arrest of Little Bo Beep, for neglect! Janet Cecin   
