New Zealand responded to a mass shooting in ways that the United States hasn’t — here’s why
   It’s been 20 years since the Columbine shooting — the Colorado high school attack that initiated the modern wave of United States mass shootings. 
   It’s been more than six years since the tragedy at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut. A gunman fatally shot 20 children and six adults inside the Newtown school before turning the weapon on himself. The call for gun safety legislation was loud, but it went mostly ignored. 
   Four years later, 50 people were killed when a gunman unleashed a hail of gunfire inside the Pulse Night Club in Orlando on June 12, 2016. It became the deadliest shooting in modern U.S. history until a little over a year later, when a shooter rained bullets down on a crowd of people enjoying a country music festival on the Las Vegas strip. Fifty-nine people were killed in the attack. 
   Change seemed inevitable in wake of the Parkland Massacre on Feb. 14, 2018, when former student Nikolas Cruz gunned down 17 of his classmates and teachers inside Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Florida. Students recorded the terror and shared it in real-time and survivors channeled their grief into advocacy, calling for a ban on the assault weapon used in the attack on their school. 
   But after all of those attacks, the U.S. government declined to decisively respond to gun violence on a federal level. 
   In contrast, New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern on Thursday announced sweeping changes to New Zealand’s gun laws, including a ban on assault rifles and military style weapons, less than a week after accused gunman Brenton Tarrant killed 50 people gathered for prayer in two separate mosques in Christchurch. 
   Shannon Watts, founder of Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, said there are several reasons to explain why the United States has failed for years to accomplish what New Zealand has achieved in only six days — including inactive lawmakers. 
   “Our leaders in Congress basically have sat on their hands while 100 Americans are killed by gun violence each day,” she said. It’s also “in part because we have a powerful gun lobby that persuades lawmakers against passing legislation to protect people from gun violence.” 
   New Zealand is also a significantly smaller country than the United States, with a population of about 5 million, compared to more than 325 million people in the United States. About the same amount of people live in New Zealand as Louisiana — America’s 25th-largest state. And where there are more people in the U.S., there are significantly more opinions, many of which can stand in direct contrast with each other. 
   There are also many more guns in the United States — roughly one gun for every person, compared to one for every three New Zealanders. 
   Another notable difference is that New Zealand residents don’t have the inalienable right to bear arms and self-defense provided to Americans through the Second Amendment. 
   “In America we see the gun lobby constantly flogging the second amendment like it’s a suicide pact, not a guiding principle in creating legislative framework,” Watts said. 
   Watts, a mother of five, said the Sandy Hook shooting six years ago inspired her to found Moms Demand Action. What started as a Facebook group with a call to curb gun violence has since transformed into an advocacy group with chapters in every state. 
   “Ultimately, it’s so important that people understand and realize we have made progress in the last six years,” she noted, citing activists’ blocking of the gun lobby’s priority legislation at a federal level for the entirety of Trump’s presidency so far. 
   “They very much expected to have a return on their $30 million investment,” Watts said, referring to the NRA’s financial contributions to boost President Trump’s candidacy amid the 2016 election. 
   Watts also pointed to electoral gains in midterm elections, which paved the way for the introduction and passage of HR8. The legislation expands background checks to cover all gun sales and represents one of the most “monumental” pieces of gun violence legislation to pass the house in two decades. 
   And in 2018, gun safety laws were passed in 20 states, nine of which were signed into law by a Republican governor. 
   “This is a marathon, not a sprint. I wish we could act as quickly as New Zealand has, but it’s just all the more reason to get off the sidelines,” Watts said. 
   She also praised Ardern for taking swift action while treating grieving members of the community with compassion and kindness. 
   “The prime minister of New Zealand showed how leaders should lead, but also what women’s leadership looks like,” Watts said. She added the fact that Ardern is female is notable because polling ranks the issue of gun violence highest among women — particularly women of color. 
   “When we do elect women to office, from city council to Congress, we do see a shift on this issue.”   
