Facebook responds to critics by saying 1.2 million attempted uploads of Friday's massacre in New Zealand were blocked
   Facebook claims to have acted with impressive efficiency in stopping footage from Friday’s mosque massacre in New Zealand from going viral. 
   “In the first 24 hours we removed 1.5 million videos of the attack globally, of which over 1.2 million were blocked at upload...,” Facebook said in the tweet. 
   A spokeswoman for the social networking company claimed that during the day of the attack, 300,000 videos of the cold-blooded slaughter were taken down and four times that number were blocked before they could be uploaded. 
   “Out of respect for the people affected by this tragedy and the concerns of local authorities, we're also removing all edited versions of the video that do not show graphic content,” New Zealand Facebook spokeswoman Mia Garlick posted on Twitter. 
   After affixing a camera onto what appears to be some form of headgear, white nationalist Brenton Harrison began a shooting spree that left 50 Muslims dead and dozens more injured inside a pair of mosques, which he broadcast live. He also downloaded a 74-page manifesto to Twitter explaining his ideology. 
   Efforts to largely remove that screed from the Web were also reportedly successful. 
   Online video streaming service YouTube also put out a statement saying it was working diligently to stop footage of the tragedy from spreading. 
   On the day of the shooting, Counter Extremism Project advisor Lucinda Creighton told CNN that in her opinion, Facebook, YouTube and Twitter need to do more to stop this sort of footage from being posted in the first place. 
   “The tech companies basically don't see this as a priority, they wring their hands, they say this is terrible,” Creighton reportedly said. “But what they're not doing is preventing this from reappearing.” 
   New Zealand officials have focused on identifying victims of the shooting as quickly as possible because Islamic law calls for bodies to be buried within 24 hours after their death. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern reportedly said some victims’ remains had been turned over to family and others will be surrendered throughout the week. 
   Memorial services and vigils took place throughout New Zealand Sunday, according to USA Today.   
