Money Raised for ‘Egg Boy’ Will Be Donated to New Zealand Victims
SYDNEY, Australia — Money raised for a teenager who shot to worldwide fame after smashing an egg on the head of an Australian far-right politician will go toward the victims of the New Zealand mosque shootings, according to his fund-raising page.
On Tuesday morning, a GoFundMe page for Will Connolly, now commonly known as Egg Boy, had already surpassed its goal of raising 50,000 Australian dollars, about $35,000. An update on the page said the 17-year-old Mr. Connolly “plans to send a majority of the money to the victims of the Christchurch terror attack.” The funds were originally intended to cover his legal fees and to help him buy “more eggs.”
The teenager gained fame after smashing an egg on the head of Fraser Anning, an anti-immigration senator, as the senator spoke to reporters in Melbourne, Australia, on Friday. The incident happened after Mr. Anning was widely condemned for a statement he made that day blaming Muslim immigration for Friday’s massacre in Christchurch, New Zealand.
After getting hit with the egg, Mr. Anning turned around and struck Mr. Connolly in the face twice. A brawl broke out that ended with Mr. Connolly being pinned down by men in the crowd. Mr. Connolly was arrested at the scene and released pending further investigation, the police said.
As video of the incident went viral, people around the world have rallied around “Egg Boy” as a hero and symbol in the fight against bigotry. Mr. Connolly has been offered concert tickets for life and free vacations, and he has been portrayed in street art and on T-shirts.
But Mr. Anning deplored his behavior in remarks Monday.
“He got a slap across the face, which is what his mother should have given him long ago because he’s been misbehaving badly,” Mr. Anning told reporters in Brisbane. The senator refused to apologize for his comments on the shooting, saying it was a “statement of fact.”
More than a million people have signed a petition calling for Mr. Anning’s resignation. Political leaders, including Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand and Scott Morrison, her Australian counterpart, have condemned the senator’s statement.
Mr. Connolly has not responded to requests for comment. According to screenshots from the GoFundMe page, he has said he is “under strict restrictions to limit his posts on social media.”
The teenager has been “overwhelmed” with positive messages and was cooperating with the police as they investigated the incident, Peter Gordon, a lawyer representing Mr. Connolly, told reporters on Tuesday.
He said his client was “committed that every cent of the money raised from the GoFundMe page go towards supporting the victims of the tragedy in Christchurch.”
