Hezbollah Says Drones That Crashed in Beirut Suburbs Came From Israel
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Two drones crashed in the southern suburbs of Beirut early Sunday, an area that is home to many supporters of the Iran-backed militia Hezbollah, which said the aircraft came from neighboring Israel.
The crashes came a day after Israeli warplanes struck targets in Syria where, according to the Israeli military, Iran had been preparing to attack Israel using explosive-laden “killer drones.” Hezbollah, which has sent thousands of forces to Syria to fight in support of President Bashar al-Assad, said two of its fighters were killed in that strike.
The weekend events further heightened tensions between the United States and its regional allies on one side and Iran and the local forces it backs on the other. So far, the struggle has played out mostly through the diversion of oil tankers, drone attacks, covert support to militant groups and strikes on military bases said to be used by the Iranians.
But the frequency of such incidents and the heated rhetoric on both sides has raised fears that a wider conflict could be on the way.
With Iran’s economy reeling from sanctions imposed by the United States, Tehran is less able to fund its allies than it was in the past. And with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu fighting for his political future as an election looms in Israel, there is speculation that he is turning up the heat on Iran as a ploy for votes.
Over the years, Iran has built a network of allies and militant groups to help advance its interests in Iraq, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen. The United States considers some of those allies, including Hezbollah, terrorist organizations.
The Trump administration has made pushing back against Iran a major part of its Middle East policy, a goal it shares with Israel, Saudi Arabia, and other regional powers.
In a speech on Sunday, Hassan Nasrallah, the head of Hezbollah, addressed the weekend’s events and promised that his group would respond to any further Israeli attacks.
Mr. Nasrallah said that early Sunday morning, residents of a neighborhood south of Beirut where Hezbollah holds significant sway noticed a surveillance drone flying between the apartment buildings and threw rocks at it. It came down, and some time later, Mr. Nasrallah said, a second drone exploded near where the first had fallen.
“What happened last night was an attack by a suicide plane on a specific target in the southern suburbs of Beirut,” he said.
The drone that exploded blew out the windows of a media office belonging to Hezbollah. A Hezbollah spokesman said that no one was seriously injured.
In his speech, Mr. Nasrallah said that Hezbollah, which is both a political party represented in Lebanon’s government and the country’s most powerful military force, would no longer tolerate Israeli drones in Lebanese airspace.
“From now on, we will confront the Israeli drones in the skies of Lebanon,” he said. “The Israeli drones, when they enter Lebanese skies, we will work to bring them down.”
The Lebanese Army confirmed that one drone fell and another exploded in the capital’s southern suburbs around 2:30 a.m. local time. “The army arrived immediately cordoned off the area where the two drones fell,” it said in a statement.
During a brief interview in the damaged media office, where the group often meets foreign journalists and other visitors, the Hezbollah spokesman, Mohammed Afif, said that Hezbollah had not shot down either of the drones.
But Mr. Afif said that his group had retrieved the first drone and the remains of the second, and that it would analyze them to establish their mission.
One theory was that the first drone had crashed and the second had been dispatched to destroy it, he said. Another theory was that the first drone had been sent to scope out a target for the second drone to attack.
“Maybe it was looking for a target,” Mr. Afif said. “Was its target the media office? A target nearby? Someone in the same building? A convoy? We don’t know what the target was.”
Yaakov Amidror, a former adviser to Mr. Netanyahu and a former military intelligence chief, said that he did not know whether the exploding drone in Beirut was Israeli, but that it could have been sent as a message to Hezbollah.
“If it is, it means that Israel decided to show Hezbollah that there is a price” for its actions in Syria, he said.
But Mr. Amidror said, “I’m not sure that this is an Israeli operation.”
Mr. Nasrallah challenged the Israeli narrative of its strikes in Syria the day before. While Israel’s military said it had targeted Iranian operatives planning to launch military drones toward Israel, Mr. Nasrallah said the strike had hit a Hezbollah position, killing two of its fighters.
He vowed that Hezbollah would respond to further killing of Hezbollah fighters “in Lebanon.”
It was unclear what exactly he meant, but Hezbollah is believed to have an arsenal of more than 100,000 rockets and missiles in Lebanon that it could fire at Israel. And in the past it has captured Israeli soldiers near the Lebanese-Israeli border.
A senior commander for Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps also denied on Sunday that Israel had hit Iranian targets in Syria, according to Iran’s semiofficial ILNA news agency.
“This is a lie and not true,” the commander, Maj. Gen. Mohsen Rezaei, was quoted as saying. “Israel and the United States do not have the power to attack Iran’s various centers.”
