Our Tennis Expert on Bianca Andreescu
Not long after she became the first Canadian to win the Rogers Cup in 50 years, Bianca Andreescu, the 19-year-old tennis prodigy from Mississauga, is making her mark at the U.S. Open. She has moved onto the third round and will play Denmark’s Caroline Wozniacki on Saturday.
Christopher Clarey, a global sports reporter for The New York Times, is one of the world’s authorities on tennis. He spoke to me from the U.S. Open in New York on Friday about Andreescu. Below are edited excerpts from our conversation.
If you want to know more about Andreescu, I recommend two articles Chris wrote this past spring from the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calf., which she won:
[Read: Bianca Andreescu Is Rising in the Tennis Rankings Ahead of Schedule]
[Read: Bianca Andreescu Completes a Stunning Run to the Indian Wells Title]
And you can follow our extensive coverage of the U.S. Open here.
—Altagracia Alvino is a cook with an unusual specialty: she feeds major league baseball players, especially ones from the Dominican Republic, when they’re in Toronto. James Wagner paid a visit and found that she “may be the most popular and powerful grandmother in baseball.”
—This week, Canada deported Yang Wei to China, Ian Johnson reported, after a court “brushed off concerns about his work as a dissident, saying there was no proof he would face incarceration if he returned.” Mr. Yang had been arrested repeatedly, and had once stabbed a bus driver 13 times. But his supporters said that the incidents were caused by mental illness, and that Mr. Yang almost certainly faces brutal treatment in a Chinese jail because of his past.
—This month in Canada, Netflix is streaming a new series starring Sacha Baron Cohen as a Mossad agent and the series “Criminal” about investigators and interrogation rooms that’s set in four countries. Our monthly picks for Canadian viewers can be found here.
—The journalist, podcaster and author Malcolm Gladwell, a proud son of Elmira, Ontario, spoke with Amy Chozick about trust and human nature.
—Kevin McDonald, once of “The Kids in the Hall,” has a one man show in New York, which Alexis Soloski, one of our critics, attended. “If you aren’t an ardent ‘Kids in the Hall’ fan, little in the show, except for Mr. McDonald’s frequent mentions of his passionate hatred of Winnipeg, will make much sense to you,” she wrote. “Then again, if you aren’t, you should be.”
—Not long after Justin Trudeau came to office, he restarted the selection process for Canada’s new fleet of fighter jets. The previous Conservative government had gone with the F-35, which is the United States’ most expensive weapons program ever. For The New York Times Magazine, Valerie Insinna has taken an in-depth look at the project. “The F-35 may not be the high-profile problem child it once was,” she wrote. “But the Pentagon’s efforts to play down new complications raise questions about whether America’s most controversial warplane is actually ready to move into its next phase and what kind of new problems might surface.”
—Back in the days of the Obama administration, Canada and the United States agreed on a joint program to cut methane emissions, a potent greenhouse gas. Now the Trump administration has pulled out of its side of the deal.
—September marks the start of the season when new electronic gadgets start appearing in stores. Brian X. Chen, our columnist whose job is to review those products, has some advice: stick with the old and proven to save money and for greater satisfaction.
