What Is Lost When a Museum Vanishes? In Brazil, a Nation’s Story
Ash is still blowing through the park surrounding Brazil’s National Museum, which continues to tally its losses. According to the deputy director at the museum, a 200-year-old Rio de Janeiro institution, the fire that burned down much of the building two weeks ago may have consumed 90 percent of the collection.
That’s thousands, maybe millions, of objects — incomprehensible numbers.
It’s always easier to think in smaller terms, specific examples. The museum preserved documentation of indigenous languages for which there are no longer any living native speakers, as The New York Times has reported. Every one of those records apparently went up in smoke, taking with it a culture, a civilization, the story of a life, a chapter of us.
Because that’s what museums like the National Museum ultimately do. They piece together the narrative of who we are, where we come from, where we belong — in the universe, on this planet, as nations, communities, individuals.
For generation after generation, the National Museum, a repository of science, art and history, has been where parents passed down to their children what it means to be human and, more specifically, what it means to be Brazilian. A former colonial slave traders’ home that was later turned into a royal palace, the building itself was the site of key moments in the country’s history, part of the national narrative, and therefore a place of deep symbolism and pride.
It’s no wonder that the fire became an instant metaphor for the country’s decline. While it was still burning, crowds gathered at the museum gates. Afterward, a group of students issued a call for any photographs, videos, even selfies taken with the collection and in the exhibition spaces, to create a digital archive, a kind of virtual bulwark against forgetfulness.
“The National Museum was part of the childhood of each of us,” explained Luana Santos, one of the students organizing the effort. Thousands of images have already been uploaded.
