   Famed Formula 1 racing champ Niki Lauda has died months after receiving a double lung transplant, his family confirmed Monday.  
   He was 70.  
   “With deep sadness, we announce that our beloved Niki has peacefully passed away with his family on Monday,” the family said in a statement to the Austrian press agency, reported The Guardian. “A role model and a benchmark for all of us, he was a loving and caring husband, father and grandfather away from the public, and he will be missed.” 
   Lauda, who won world titles in 1975, 1977 and 1984, “was one of the most respected and well-liked characters in the F1 paddock, as well as being one of the best drivers the sport has ever seen,” the Formula 1 news site GP Blog said.  
   In 1976 Lauda nearly lost his life in a fiery wreck on the track. But despite suffering severe burns, he was back behind the wheel six weeks later and won his second world championship the following year.  
   Lauda’s Formula 1 feats and his fierce rivalry with racing nemesis James Hunt were legendary and sparked the 2013 movie Rush, directed by Ron Howard and starring Daniel Brühl, Chris Hemsworth and Olivia Wilde.  
   The racer had undergone a double lung transplant last August after collapsing while on vacation in Ibiza. He was planning to return to the Formula 1 racing paddock this spring to resume his role as an adviser to the Mercedes team. But earlier Monday reports surfaced that he had been transferred instead to a private clinic in Switzerland, GP Blog reported.  
   “Due to kidney problems, he had to be transferred from the rehabilitation centre to a private clinic for dialysis,” his brother Florian Lauda told GP Blog.  
   Toto Wolff, boss of the Mercedes team that Lauda was a member of, told the GP Blog, “Niki has good weeks and also some setbacks.” 
   Lauda had had kidney transplants in 1997 and 2005, according to the New Zealand Herald. 
   “The 70-year-old three-time Formula 1 world champion and flight entrepreneur had peacefully fallen asleep with his family on Monday, the family said on Tuesday night,” the New Zealand Herald reported, quoting the Austrian newspaper Volksblatt.   
