Egypt Shakes Up Security Forces After Deadly Ambush of Police
CAIRO — Egypt carried out a sweeping reshuffle of its security forces, removing a dozen senior police and military officials from critical posts just a week after an ambush by militants killed at least 16 policemen in the desert outside Cairo.
The brief police and military statements that announced the move late on Saturday did not give a reason for the shake-up.
But Egyptian security officials said the reorganization was prompted by the devastating attack, which targeted a police convoy inside the country’s western desert on Oct. 20. The security officials declined to be named because they were not authorized to discuss the matter publicly.
Saturday’s shake-up included the dismissal of Mahmoud Hegazy, the military chief of staff; 11 police generals, including the security chief of Giza, the area where the attack occurred; and the head of the National Security Agency, the police’s intelligence division.
Mr. Hegazy, whose daughter is married to a son of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, was appointed to a new position as crisis management adviser to the president, the military statement said.
Egyptian military and police spokesmen could not be immediately reached for comment on the shake-up on Sunday.
The ambush drew widespread public criticism of the government’s campaign against Islamist violence and the performance of Egypt’s security agencies. In the days after the attack, Egyptian officials vehemently denied news reports that suggested a lack of coordination between agencies and an intelligence failure were partly to blame for the losses.
Mr. Sisi’s campaign against armed Islamist groups began in July 2013, shortly after he, as military chief at the time, ousted Mohamed Morsi, an Islamist president, amid mass protests. Most of the violence is confined to the northern half of the Sinai Peninsula, where an Islamic State affiliate is based.
The group has broadened its campaign this year to include Egypt’s Coptic Christian minority, attacking churches, Christian homes and pilgrims across the country.
Several young officers said the attack lowered morale, and some accused the Interior Ministry of failing to provide their slain colleagues with sufficient backup.
“We can say that this shake-up was principally conducted to placate the public and certain segments inside the police,” said Ahmed Kamel El-Beheiri, a security researcher at the state-run Al-Ahram Center for Strategic Studies. “The fact that the move includes the military chief of staff means that they are also trying to overhaul their strategy against terrorism because of all the recent attacks.”
Egyptian security officials told several news outlets, including The New York Times, that the ambush attack killed over 50 policemen, but the Egyptian Interior Ministry insisted that only 16 died. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity fearing reprisals. The conflicting figures given could not be reconciled.
Several local news websites and social media users published some of the names of the killed policemen. The posts could not be independently verified, but at least 12 of the reported names were not on the official list of victims.
The slain officers were on their way to attack what was believed to be a militant hide-out in the desert, acting on a faulty intelligence tip, the officials said. As they neared their destination, militants raked the police convoy with rockets and gunfire.
Hasm, a small Islamist group that emerged last year, claimed responsibility for the attack, which was the deadliest in years to target the police. But militancy experts questioned the claim’s authenticity and said the attack was most likely carried out by Islamic State militants because it involved the use of heavy weapons and its location.
The western desert has long been home to smugglers and militants of all stripes. It also links Egypt to neighboring Libya, a lawless country that is hosting a variety of armed Islamist groups, including Islamic State fighters.
There was, however, no other claim of responsibility from the Islamic State or other groups.
