Jews of the Diaspora Bring Their Cause to the Israeli Public
JERUSALEM — In June, when Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel abruptly suspended a hard-won accord to give non-Orthodox Jewish men and women a more dignified place to worship together at the Western Wall in Jerusalem, and then moved to bolster Orthodox control over conversions to Judaism in Israel, the backlash was swift and fierce.
Protesters rallied outside Mr. Netanyahu’s home. Powerful American allies angrily demanded meetings. Philanthropists in the diaspora threatened to cut off their aid to Israel.
Insults flew. Mr. Netanyahu accused the Reform movement, which has many adherents in the United States but relatively few in Israel, of using the Western Wall agreement to gain recognition in the country “via the back door, secretly.”
Reform and Conservative Jewish leaders accused the prime minister of lying and trying to incite the ultra-Orthodox against them. The Sephardic chief rabbi of Jerusalem likened Reform Jews to Holocaust deniers.
With old arguments over who is a Jew playing out nastily again in public, it seemed that major portions of American and Israeli Jewry were heading for a damaging breach.
In the Old City on Monday, visiting leaders of the Reform and Conservative movements who had pressed for the changes at the Western Wall could do little more than fume, as a minister in Mr. Netanyahu’s government described for them a weak consolation prize: minor improvements to the tucked-away space where mixed-gender prayer has long been confined, largely unseen and all but undiscoverable to those who are not specifically looking for it.
“A few little crumbs,” Rabbi Rick Jacobs, president of the Union for Reform Judaism, bitterly called it.
Yet rather than ratcheting up the name-calling war with Mr. Netanyahu’s government, Rabbi Jacobs and other leaders of the Jewish Agency of Israel — a group that supports Jewish diversity and inclusion and that helped negotiate the Western Wall agreement — now say they are starting an ambitious campaign to influence public opinion about the needs of diaspora and less-religious Jews where they are understood least, and where their political clout is feeblest: in Israel itself.
On Tuesday, 120 of the group’s international board of governors plan to descend on Parliament, meeting with dozens of Israeli legislators, including some members of the ultra-Orthodox parties, in what Natan Sharansky, the former Soviet dissident who leads the Jewish Agency, called “our biggest lobbying effort ever.”
“The problem is not just that the prime minister gave in to political pressure,” he said in an interview. “The ministers feel that they don’t have to pay a political price, and that’s because there’s not that much awareness” of the needs of non-Orthodox Jews. “So we’re doing a lot of other work to make Israeli society know this problem better.”
The lobbying day is to be followed by an advertising and media campaign, educational efforts in Israeli schools and trips for Israeli lawmakers and leaders to the United States “to give them a real-life glimpse of what and who we are,” said Rabbi Jacobs of the Reform movement. “The assumptions and mistaken understandings of what world Jewry are about are legion.”
The fight over equitable access to the Western Wall, the holiest place where Jews can pray, is in a sense a fight over real estate. Popular images of Jewish men worshiping at the wall in prayer shawls and phylacteries show only a small stretch of the ancient retaining wall for the Temple Mount. A large section of that plaza is reserved for men, a smaller one for women.
Some distance to the south is Robinson’s Arch, an area of the wall designated in 2003 to host egalitarian prayer services. Yet the limitations of that setting — on a temporary platform, down a lengthy staircase from the main plaza, surrounded by fences and other obstructions, and accessible through an isolated gate — have upset Reform and Conservative Jewish leaders.
Their complaints appeared to be satisfied in January 2016, when after years of negotiations Mr. Netanyahu’s government approved a compromise that would create an improved egalitarian prayer space, along with a joint entrance to all the Western Wall prayer areas. Reform and Conservative Jews were to be given a stake in a committee overseeing the complex’s management. All told, the agreement would give non-Orthodox worshipers, at least to a degree, the feeling of equal status.
Nearly a year and a half went by without its being adopted, however. And in June, just as the Jewish Agency was meeting in Jerusalem, Mr. Netanyahu bowed to fierce pressure from his ultra-Orthodox coalition partners and announced he was suspending the agreement.
In a meeting at Robinson’s Arch on Monday, Tzachi Hanegbi, a minister without portfolio in Mr. Netanyahu’s government, assured leaders of the Jewish Agency that plans were continuing to improve the prayer space, and he said that management of it would be entrusted to the Israel Antiquities Authority, which he said could be trusted to treat all branches of Judaism fairly.
“It’s true that the entrance is not going to be equal,” Mr. Hanegbi added, acknowledging a key grievance arising from Mr. Netanyahu’s reversal, and then minimizing it: “But I don’t think that the Jewish people for 3,500 years prayed for an entrance.”
Mr. Hanegbi was frank about the political challenges facing Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition, which he said had been in danger of collapse in June over the Western Wall deal. When he suggested more negotiations, one of the visiting officials asked him what guarantee there was that even a renegotiated deal would ever be carried out.
“Nothing,” he replied. “That’s the truth.”
Mr. Hanegbi gamely hung around long enough for Jewish Agency representatives to try their hand at the new mission of educating Israelis about the concerns of diaspora Jews. Shoshana Dweck, an executive with the Association of Reform Zionists of America, urged him to consider how demeaning it felt to be relegated to second-class citizenship.
“It was never about a seat at a lunch counter, or a seat on the bus,” she said in a scolding near-whisper.
Mr. Sharansky’s organization and its diverse membership see other threats on the near horizon, not least the bill to tighten ultra-Orthodox control over conversions to Judaism in Israel. Mr. Netanyahu delayed a vote on the conversion bill for six months, but that means it could come up for final passage in December.
All of which leaves people like Rabbi Jacobs in something of a hurry.
“We’re geared up and ready to fight a long and important battle,” he said late on Monday. “It’s a battle that’s for the soul of Israel.”
