SYDNEY, Australia — The refugees and asylum seekers had been waiting in the detention camp in the hope of a fresh start in Australia, or perhaps some other country. But on Monday, some of the residents said, they were told to prepare for a different outcome — the imminent shutdown of the camp.
Parts of the center, on Manus Island in Papua New Guinea, will close in weeks, according to the detainees, who said they had been told of the decision at a meeting on Monday. The rest of the compound, which was financed by the Australian government, will shut down later this year.
“You cannot stay at the regional processing center,” an official said in a recording first obtained by the Australian news media. “You need to consider your options. No one will be resettled in Australia.”
Asylum seekers and refugees have been sent to the island, in northern Papua New Guinea, as part of an agreement between the country and Australia. Under the deal, which has been condemned by human rights groups and the United Nations, people who tried to reach Australia by boat were placed in the detention center as their refugee claims were being considered.
Advocates for the detainees have described the complex, one of two offshore centers that Australia has financed in the South Pacific, as cramped with inadequate medical facilities, and have said that residents face violence and other abuse.
The majority of men at the detention center have been formally recognized as refugees. Those who have not have had their claims denied, or their cases are still being assessed or appealed. The United States has agreed to accept some of the refugees under an agreement reached by the Obama administration and subsequently criticized by President Trump.
Those who have not been recognized as refugees — with so-called negative status — have been told that they could voluntarily return to their countries of origin with a financial package from the Australian government that they have until Aug. 30 to accept, The Guardian reported.
Behrouz Boochani, an Iranian refugee who has been detained on Manus Island since 2013, said that those granted refugee status would be kept separate from those who had not been.
“Immigration is telling people that their plan is to remove those people who were interviewed for America” and place them in a camp near Lorengau, on the east side of the island, he said.
Mr. Boochani said refugees did not feel safe being placed there and would “resist” the move. They are also fearful that the deal to resettle them in the United States will unravel, making the new camp a permanent home.
Amnesty International said in a recent report that it received text messages, videos and images from detainees of shots being fired by Papua New Guinea Defense Force soldiers at the complex on Manus Island in April. The Australian Department of Immigration and Border Protection said that the soldiers had discharged a weapon into the air, the organization said.
The report also said that the department “downplayed the incident.” The department told ABC News that the group did not seek a response when compiling the report.
“The recent events — which now come with further fresh evidence that their compound may have been fired upon by soldiers — only adds to the dire situation that these men have been held in for years now,” said David Manne, the executive director of Refugee Legal, which provides legal support.
