U.N. Reports Sharp Increase in Children Killed or Maimed in Conflicts
More than 10,000 children were killed or maimed in armed conflicts last year, the United Nations reported on Wednesday in an annual survey that is closely examined because it names and shames countries that fail to protect children.
The suffering occurred across the world.
In Yemen, a coalition backed by the United States and led by Saudi Arabia was responsible for more than 1,300 child deaths or injuries recorded in 2017. The Saudis quickly disputed that conclusion.
In Syria, where a civil war has dragged on for seven years, more human rights abuses against children were recorded than ever before.
The number of children recruited for armed violence quadrupled in the Central African Republic and doubled in the Democratic Republic of Congo, compared with 2016.
“When your own house or your school can be attacked without qualms, when traditional safe-havens become targets, how can boys and girls escape the brutality of war?” Virginia Gamba, the United Nations secretary general’s special representative for children and armed conflict, said in a statement. “This shows a blatant disregard for international law by parties to conflict, making civilians, especially children, increasingly vulnerable to violence, use and abuse.”
Her office confirmed more than 900 cases of rape and sexual violence, but the actual number could be higher.
She deplored the abuses. “It is the use of human beings as toys, as weapons, as terror, to confuse society, and to divide those children from even the remotest possibility of ever being an active part of society,” she said.
Here is a brief guide to the findings.
Why is the report carried out?
The United Nations General Assembly established the mandate of the special representative in 1996, following a report by Graça Machel, a Mozambican politician and the third wife of the South African leader Nelson Mandela. Three years later, the Security Council adopted the first resolution on children and armed conflict, which paved the way for the report to be published.
Under a resolution adopted in 2005, the report counts six categories of human rights violations: killing and maiming, recruitment or use of children as soldiers, sexual violence, abduction, attacks against schools or hospitals and denial of humanitarian access.
Why is it important?
The report includes a list which monitors use to “name and shame” countries that have failed to protect children. The list is meant to coerce these countries into improving.
This year’s report named 59 nonstate actors and 10 state actors in 14 countries, including the armed forces led by the Syrian government, the Taliban in Afghanistan and the Islamic State in Iraq.
The countries were Afghanistan, Central African Republic, Colombia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Iraq, Mali, Myanmar, Nigeria, the Philippines, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syria and Yemen.
The list has at times led to intense political jockeying. Two years ago, the United Nations included Saudi Arabia on the list. The country forcefully protested, and the secretary general at the time, Ban Ki-moon, removed Saudi Arabia  pending review. The United Nations also kept Israel and the militant group Hamas off the list, even though experts had recommended that they be included.
This year’s report did not explicitly criticize Saudi Arabia, but made clear that a coalition of Arab countries fighting the Houthis, a Shiite rebel group in Yemen, should be held to account. More than half of the 1,300 children reported killed in Yemen last year died in airstrikes. Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are the leading members of the coalition, and have significant military partnerships with the United States.
In a statement issued Wednesday night, the Saudi coalition rejected the report’s findings and criticized the United Nations for what the coalition called “inaccurate information provided by unreliable sources.”
On Wednesday, the advocacy group Human Rights Watch criticized the United Nations for not including the governments of Israel, Sudan and Iraq, and actors in Ukraine in the report.
“The voluminous evidence in the report on violations against children in Yemen, Sudan, and Palestine show that the secretary general’s ‘list of shame’ is tainted by completely unjustified omissions,” said Jo Becker, children’s rights advocacy director at Human Rights Watch, in a news release.
Where is the violence getting worse? 
The United Nations recorded 21,000 “grave violations of children’s rights” last year, a big increase from the 15,500 recorded in 2016.
Many of the violations occurred in countries where governmental authority is weak.
In Somalia, the Shabab, a militant group affiliated with Al Qaeda, kidnapped more than 1,600 children to replenish its fighting force.
In South Sudan, the United Nations found, at least 1,200 children were recruited and used in armed conflict.
In Nigeria, the Islamist group Boko Haram kidnapped girls as young as 8, raped them and strapped explosive vests to them, using the girls as human bombs to kill relatives and neighbors.
The abuses went beyond armed violence.
In Iraq, at least 1,036 children were held in juvenile detention facilities on suspicion of links with the Islamic State. In Nigeria, more than 1,900 children were deprived of liberty because of their parents’ alleged association with Boko Haram.
The report argued that children who were previously associated with armed groups should be treated primarily as victims — and should be detained only as a last resort.
The United Nations also found that lifesaving aid had been denied to children, as a tactic of war, in places like Myanmar, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen.
“Preventing violations against children affected by conflict should be a primary concern of the international community,” the report read, assailing all countries for “failing to assume this collective responsibility.”
