Jamal Khashoggi’s Killing  Here’s What We Know
After weeks of leaking snippets of information, the Turkish president laid out his first detailed account of the killing of the dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi inside the Saudi Consulate. And a Saudi investment conference opened in Riyadh despite a widespread international boycott over the writer’s death.
The divergent scenes were the latest twists in a fast-moving saga that has tarnished the reputation of Saudi Arabia and its 33-year-old crown prince after the kingdom finally admitted that Mr. Khashoggi had been killed by Saudi agents inside the Istanbul consulate, weeks after he went missing.
The saga has strained relations between Turkey and Saudi Arabia, putting the United States in the middle of a dispute between two critical allies. Here are some of the most important updates:
• President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey said Tuesday that Mr. Khashoggi’s killing was a “premeditated murder” and pressed the Saudis for a comprehensive explanation. He wants the case to be adjudicated in Turkey.
• Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, received a standing ovation when he made an unannounced appearance at the opening of an investment conference in Riyadh on Tuesday. Several prominent figures, including Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and dozens of executives and world leaders, have withdrawn from the conference.
•Saudi state media reported on Friday that Mr. Khashoggi was strangled after an argument and fistfight with unidentified Saudi men inside the Istanbul consulate and that 18 men were arrested and are under investigation. None were identified.
• The Trump administration has sent mixed signals since Saudi Arabia put forth its version of events, from defending its alliance with the country to demanding further explanation.
The bulk of evidence about Saudi Arabia’s involvement in the killing of Mr. Khashoggi has come from leaks by Turkish authorities to pro-government news outlets. On Tuesday, President Erdogan reaffirmed many of those details. This included the identification of 15 Saudis whom Turkish officials said had been sent to assassinate Mr. Khashoggi and dispose of his body.
Details in an audio recording from inside the consulate show that Saudi agents were waiting when Mr. Khashoggi walked into the building, and that he was dead within minutes, a senior Turkish official said. The audio revealed that Mr. Khashoggi was beheaded and dismembered with his fingers severed and that within two hours, the killers were gone.
The New York Times confirmed that at least nine of the 15 suspects identified by Turkish authorities worked for the Saudi security services, military or other government ministries.
One of those men, Maher Abdulaziz Mutreb, has traveled extensively with Crown Prince Mohammed, including in recent trips to the United States, perhaps as a bodyguard.
On Thursday, the Turkish pro-government news outlet Sabah released photos showing Mr. Mutreb entering the Saudi consulate in Istanbul hours before Mr. Khashoggi arrived on Oct. 2. Another suspect, Dr. Salah al-Tubaigy, is an autopsy expert, lending credence to reports that the writer’s assassination was planned.
The Saudi team also included a body double who was wearing Mr. Khashoggi’s clothes and was seen walking the streets of Istanbul shortly after the writer was killed, Saudi and Turkish officials said.
When Mr. Khashoggi disappeared, the Saudi government first said it had no information on the writer’s whereabouts. Officials, including Crown Prince Mohammed himself, said that Mr. Khashoggi had left the consulate freely, and that they had no knowledge of what happened to him.
As information flowed out from Turkish officials, Saudi Arabia forcefully denied its involvement. Then, as the evidence piled up, Saudi officials changed course, finally admitting on Saturday that Mr. Khashoggi died inside the consulate but calling his death the result of an argument and fistfight.
The Saudi authorities also appeared to be laying the groundwork to blame Gen. Ahmed al-Assiri,  who also has close ties to Crown Prince Mohammed, in an effort to deflect blame from the crown prince himself.
The crown prince and his father, King Salman, met with Sahel and Salah Khashoggi, the sons of Jamal Khashoggi, in Riyadh on Tuesday, according to images released by the official Saudi press agency. The royals expressed their condolences to the family, the agency reported.
The same day, the crown price received a standing ovation as he made an unannounced appearance at the global investment conference in Riyadh, despite the controversy swirling around him.
After Mr. Khashoggi’s disappearance, Washington edged slowly toward acknowledging Saudi responsibility as the evidence against the country grew.
Early on, the Trump administration stood by its Saudi allies, even as Republican lawmakers demanded an independent inquiry into the episode and called for sanctions. Mr. Trump asserted that relations with the kingdom were “excellent,” and that he did not have plans to introduce sanctions.
Last week, Mr. Trump said that he had discussed the case with King Salman, who denied any knowledge of what had befallen Mr. Khashoggi, and that he was “immediately sending” Mr. Pompeo to meet with the king and the crown prince, and to visit with investigators in Turkey.
After Mr. Trump was briefed by Mr. Pompeo upon his return from Istanbul, the president seemed to have altered his views, saying he believed Mr. Khashoggi was dead. He expressed confidence in several intelligence reports that suggested a Saudi role in his assassination.
The same day, Mr. Mnuchin announced his withdrawal from the Future Investment Initiative conference in Riyadh after facing backlash over a decision to attend in the midst of the unresolved scandal.
Mr. Pompeo, who briefed reporters outside the White House on Thursday, said the United States would give the Saudis a few more days to conduct their investigation.
Gina Haspel, the director of the C.I.A., has traveled to Turkey this week to work on the investigation at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.
