Norway’s Viking Ships Defied Time, but Tourism May Be a Fiercer Foe
OSLO — Two of Norway’s greatest cultural treasures, the preserved Viking longships Oseberg and Gokstad, managed to survive sea voyages more than a thousand years ago, followed by centuries interred in burial mounds alongside various dignitaries and objects like a sled, board games and the remains of peacocks.
But even after they were dug up, restored and put in a museum, life has not gotten much easier for the longships. Surging tourist numbers — their display in the Viking Ship Museum in Oslo was meant to accommodate 40,000 visitors annually, but gets more than 500,000 — have brought dust, vibrations and temperature fluctuations that threaten the boats’ fragile wood.
Now, after pressure from archaeologists and museum officials, the Norwegian government has earmarked around $200 million to build a new home for the ships next door — and for the delicate operation of moving them about 50 yards. The first $4 million is to be released next year.
“This was the right decision,” said Jesper Stub Johnsen, deputy director of the National Museum of Denmark and the chairman of an international commission formed in 2012 to evaluate the risks of moving the ships. “The Viking ships are unique, even in an international context.” His commission examined four possibilities, including doing nothing, restoring the ships in place or moving them to another site farther away.
The pledge of government funding will not mean a quick trip to safety for the Oseberg and the Gokstad. Construction on a new display area will not start before 2021 and is expected to take around five years.
Hakon Glorstad, the director of the University of Oslo’s Museum of Cultural History, which includes the Viking Ship Museum, has described the ships’ condition as a “catastrophe waiting to happen.” In an interview last year, Mr. Glorstad said he and other conservationists had been warning the government for years about the potential disintegration of cultural treasures like the two ships.
He said this week that he was confident that the ships could be moved safely, noting that, as a test, the Oseberg had been lifted a fraction of an inch to be weighed.
Few details are definitively known about the ships, including whether they were coastal raiders, explorers, trading vessels, or were built simply for pageantry.
“We don’t know where these ships went,” Mr. Glorstad said. He described the Oseberg, thought to be built around 820, as a “Viking-era superyacht” most likely constructed for journeys around Oslo. In contrast, he said, the Gokstad could have traveled as far as England, Iceland, the Mediterranean, the Black Sea or the Caspian Sea.
He added that it was unlikely that the Gokstad, built about 70 years after the Oseberg, made it to North America, as it was constructed well before the first Vikings are thought to have reached the continent around the year 1000.
The 70-foot Oseberg and the 78-foot Gokstad were immediately recognized as historic discoveries when they were found, the Gokstad in 1879 in Sandefjord, south of Oslo, and the Oseberg in 1903 on a nearby farm.
“It means the same to our part of Europe as the tomb of Tutankhamen does for Egypt,” Mr. Glorstad said.
The discovery of the Gokstad, in particular, was crucial in verifying some of the Norse sagas, he said, and the ships “provided a visual language to the recently independent Norway, searching as it was for a glorious past.”
A replica of the Gokstad was built, and in 1893 it was sailed across the Atlantic and through the Great Lakes to Chicago, where it was displayed at the Columbian Exposition. That ship is housed today near Chicago, and faces its own funding challenges for restoration.
The Viking era is enjoying a renaissance among Norwegians and foreign visitors, buoyed in part by television series like “Vikings,” on HBO; “The Last Kingdom,” on Netflix; “Game of Thrones,” with characters and plots that echo the sagas; and “Beforeigners,” a new Norwegian-language series from HBO.
That has meant more interest in Norwegian history. A permanent Viking exhibition opened this summer at the Museum of Cultural History, and Viking Planet, a private entertainment center described as a “visual portal to the Viking age” with digital recreations of the lifestyle, opened next to City Hall in Oslo.
The excavation of a newly uncovered Viking grave in Gjellestad in eastern Norway could prove the most promising such site in a hundred years, with archaeologists using georadar to find longhouses, burial mounds and possibly another ship.
Sweden is also busily staking its claim to Viking history. The Vikingaliv, or Viking Museum, opened in Stockholm in 2017, and two rare boat burial sites were recently found north of the city.
Fans can even follow the Viking cultural route through Europe, which includes about 60 sites stretching as far south as Spain and takes in Greenland, Iceland, Poland and Belarus, among other countries.
The mania for all things Viking has been a mixed blessing for the two longships. The Viking Ship Museum had already begun restricting the numbers of visitors, and was considering whether to close the ships’ display altogether if a funding solution was not found.
But the publicity may have pushed the government to act on warnings that it was underfunding cultural preservation.
“Things were done in the past that were not so wise,” Iselin Nybo, the minister of research and higher education, said on Tuesday, referring to the techniques that were used when the ships were first put on public display. “With a new museum, we are saving the ships for future generations.”
“The Viking era is part of our history,” she added, “for better or for worse.”
