U.S. Releases American Journalist Who Works for Iranian TV After Testimony
An American journalist for Iran’s Press TV was freed in Washington by federal law enforcement officials on Wednesday, her son said, ending a detention that began on Jan. 13 when the F.B.I. took her into custody as a material witness.
The arrest of the journalist, Marzieh Hashemi, 59, had become a flash point of tension between Iran and the United States for more than a week.
Ms. Hashemi had been ordered to appear before a grand jury in Washington but was not charged with a crime. Her family and Iranian leaders accused American officials of disrespecting her Muslim faith while she was under arrest, forcing her to remove her hijab, or head scarf, and offering her only non-halal food.
The F.B.I. has declined to talk about Ms. Hashemi or the grand jury case in which she had been required to testify.
Ms. Hashemi was arrested in St. Louis while on a trip to the United States to visit relatives, and was transferred by the F.B.I. to Washington. Officials later disclosed she was a material witness in an unspecified criminal case.
Under American law, witnesses can be arrested if the government can show that their testimony is “material in a criminal proceeding” and that they might flee from the authorities. The law generally requires the release of such witnesses after their testimony is completed.
Ms. Hashemi, who was born Melanie Franklin in Louisiana, converted to Islam after the 1979 Iranian revolution and moved to Iran more than a decade ago, but she has periodically returned to visit family. She is well known in Iran as an anchorwoman on Press TV’s English service.
Her son, Hossein Hashemi-Niasari, a graduate student at the University of Colorado, confirmed in a text message the accuracy of a Press TV report that she had been released after providing a third round of testimony to the grand jury on Wednesday afternoon.
Press TV also published a statement from Ms. Hashemi’s family that said she would remain in Washington for a planned protest on Friday to condemn her treatment.
“Marzieh and her family will not allow this to be swept under the carpet,” the statement said. “They still have serious grievances and want answers as to how this was allowed to happen.”
