Report Confirms That Chemical Arms Were Used on Syrian Villagers
Sarin nerve agent or a similar poison was used in an April 4 aerial attack in northern Syria that killed nearly 100 villagers, including children, the monitoring group that polices the chemical arms ban treaty concluded Thursday in a report shared with United Nations diplomats.
The report by the group, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, said the conclusions were based on evidence that included analysis of victims, environmental samples and witness interviews.
It did not answer the question of who was responsible for the attack in the rebel-held village of Khan Sheikhoun, regarded as one of the worst atrocities of the six-year-old Syria conflict, where chemical arms have been used multiple times.
While the organization did not make the report public, some diplomats with access to it conveyed the findings. The United States ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki R. Haley, even issued her own news release announcing the report’s basic conclusions.
Those conclusions had been widely expected, partly because the organization announced on April 19 that preliminary analyses showed “incontrovertible” evidence that the Khan Sheikhoun villagers had been exposed to sarin.
Nonetheless, the report constituted the first confirmation from the Hague-based organization, which monitors the Chemical Weapons Convention that most nations of the world, including Syria, have signed.
“We have the highest confidence in the O.P.C.W. report, which confirms what we already knew: chemical weapons were used against the Syrian people,” Ms. Haley said.
The report will be forwarded to a joint commission of the organization and the United Nations, she said, “to independently identify who was responsible for this horrific attack.” The joint commission was created by the Security Council to determine which combatants have been using chemical weapons in Syria.
Images of dead and dying children after the attack caused worldwide revulsion over the impunity in the war, which by some estimates has 
