Edward Kline, ‘Silent Partner’ in Aiding Soviet Dissidents, Dies at 85
Edward Kline, a Yale math major who, bored with the department store chain he inherited, devoted his career to supporting Soviet dissidents in Russia and promoting their cause abroad, died on June 24 in Manhattan. He was 85.
The cause was complications of myasthenia gravis, a deterioration of the muscles, his wife, Jill, said.
Mr. Kline became the principal contact in the United States for Andrei D. Sakharov, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning Russian physicist and human rights campaigner who was confined in domestic exile in the Volga River city of Gorky, east of Moscow, from 1980 through 1986.
In collaboration with Robert L. Bernstein, the president of Random House and himself a human rights advocate, he shepherded Sakharov’s memoirs into publication in the United States and for worldwide distribution.
“After I met Sakharov in 1976, and he agreed to have Random House publish his autobiography,” Mr. Bernstein wrote in an email, “Ed became invaluable in keeping us in touch and in the accrual editing process. When Sakharov was unable to attend his Nobel Prize ceremony in Oslo, Elena Bonner asked Ed and me and our wives to meet her in Oslo, which we did.”
Mr. Kline was also the president of the Andrei Sakharov Foundation, a human-rights organization based in Springfield, Va.
Mr. Kline was so close to Sakharov and Ms. Bonner, his wife, that in 1981 he was a stand-in bride for their son’s wedding in Montana (one of the few states that allow proxy marriages) after the Soviet authorities had refused to let his fiancée leave the country to marry him.
The couple’s four-year appeal that the fiancée be allowed to join her husband-by-proxy was finally granted after the Sakharovs mounted a 17-day hunger strike.
Mr. Kline also established Chekhov Publishing in New York, which printed books in Russian by Joseph Brodsky, Nadezhda Mandelstam and other authors who were banned in the Soviet Union. The books were spirited past Soviet border guards to grateful readers hungry for alternatives to spoon-fed propaganda.
With another dissident, Valery Chalidze, he meticulously documented rights violations by the Soviet government. The two established Khronika Press, a Russian-language publisher whose name was inspired by the leading underground human rights bulletin in the Soviet Union, the Chronicle of Current Events.
“Ed was an unsung hero,” said another collaborator, Stephen F. Cohen, emeritus professor of Russian studies at New York University and Princeton. “He wanted it that way. But now there should be a song.”
Edward Kline was born on Feb. 7, 1932, in Manhattan to the former Sylvia Halper and George Kline, who, with his brother, started a department store chain, Kline Brothers, in the Midwest.
He graduated from the Horace Mann School and received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics from Yale in 1952.
Mr. Kline was in graduate school getting an advanced degree in math when his father died suddenly, leading him to take over the family business, which had its headquarters in New York City.
In addition to his wife, the former Jill Herman, he is survived by their daughter, Carole Feuer, and two grandchildren.
While he made a success of the chain stores (they were later sold to a private investor), Mr. Kline was restless. His daughter recalled him as a self-proclaimed “moody intellectual” whose imagination 
