Evidence Contradicts Russia’s Account of the Syria Chemical Attack
The Russian government has sharply contested accounts by international leaders and witnesses that a deadly chemical attack  in northern Syria last week was carried out by Syrian government forces. Here’s what the available evidence, including a declassified four-page American intelligence report, tells us about the reliability of the Russian account.
 Russian officials, including President Vladimir V. Putin, have publicly doubted whether a toxic attack even happened, and said that any chemical weapons in Syria belonged to insurgents fighting President Bashar al-Assad’s forces, not the government. 
The White House has asserted that the Assad government carried out the attack, and that the Russians tried to cover it up by spreading “false narratives.”
There is no evidence that online video and photographs of the attack were fabricated, as Russia’s deputy envoy to the United Nations suggested last week. The images showed that scores of people, including children, died on April 4 in Khan Sheikhun, in northern Syria, suffering symptoms consistent with having breathed in some sort of nerve agent.
On Tuesday, the Turkish health minister, Recep Akdag, confirmed a preliminary report that sarin had been used after an examination of the blood and urine of four victims who were evacuated from Syria to Turkey after the attack.
Russian officials, citing their own monitoring systems, say a Syrian airstrike around noon on April 4 hit weapons-storage facilities on the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhun under the control of insurgents, including a “terrorist warehouse” where they were making “projectiles stuffed with chemical agents” to send to fighters in Iraq. Mr. Putin said Tuesday that insurgents were continuing to build chemical weapons in Syria and planned to blame any future toxic attack on the Syrian government. 
There is no independent evidence that a chemical weapons facility existed in that area. Several witnesses described an early morning attack — five hours before the Russian government says Syrian aircraft targeted insurgents. The witnesses and rescue workers said a second airstrike hit a clinic treating victims.
Also, if a chemical weapons facility had been hit, the resulting explosion would most likely have caused the chemical to burn up, international weapons experts say. And a nerve agent like sarin is not likely to be stored in its active form in such a facility, and its components would need to be mixed to be lethal.
On Tuesday, the White House said Russia was “shielding” Syria with “multiple, conflicting accounts in order to create confusion and sow doubt.”
Russian officials say insurgents making chemical weapons in a facility destroyed by the Syrian airstrike are to blame, and Mr. Putin said Tuesday that they were still at it. He said he had “no doubts” that the opponents of Mr. Assad intended to point fingers at the Syrian government should another explosion release deadly poison. Russian officials have noted that Islamic militants fighting Assad have used chemical weapons before, and he said insurgents used sarin on residents of a Damascus suburb in 2013.
Senior White House officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss the government’s view, said Russia was trying to protect Syria, its closest ally in the Middle East, from culpability. Syrian government forces carried out the attack, as they had near Damascus in 2013, the American officials said, to retaliate against rebels who were threatening government-held territory.
Western leaders including President Trump have called on Russia and Iran, Mr. Assad’s backers, to hold him accountable.
