Turkey Detains a 2nd Amnesty International Leader
ISTANBUL — A second senior official with Amnesty International, the leading human rights watchdog, has been detained in Turkey in the space of a month.
Idil Eser, the director of Amnesty’s Turkey office, was detained on Wednesday along with at least 10 others after a raid on a digital security workshop at a hotel on Buyukada, one of the Princes Islands near Istanbul.
The detainees included seven other activists from local rights groups; two foreign trainers; and the hotel owner, who was later released, Amnesty said. After the detainees were held without access to lawyers for more than a day, officials announced that they were being investigated on suspicion of connection to a terrorist group.
Ms. Eser’s detention follows that of the chairman of Amnesty’s Turkey chapter, Taner Kilic. Mr. Kilic was arrested last month on charges of having a connection to the Islamic group that is accused of spearheading the failed coup in Turkey last year.
Rights defenders are often accused of treasonous activity in Turkey, in an attempt to discredit their work. One article on a pro-government news site accused those detained on Wednesday of being spies.
The arrests were the latest salvo in a crackdown on opposition politicians, journalists and activists in Turkey that has seen about 50,000 people arrested and more than 140,000 dismissed or suspended from their jobs.
The government of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan says the purge is necessary to round up the coup plotters, but critics call the coup attempt a smoke screen to target legitimate opposition.
Thousands of academics have been dismissed under the crackdown, while more than a dozen lawmakers are in jail, as are more than 170 journalists.
Tens of thousands of Turks are marching to Istanbul, Turkey’s largest city, from Ankara, the capital, to protest a perceived breakdown in the judicial process.
But Mr. Erdogan still has significant support: Just over half of the electorate voted to grant his office more power in a recent referendum that was marred by ballot irregularities.
The secretary general of Amnesty International, Salil Shetty, condemned Ms. Eser’s detention, saying in a statement, “We are profoundly disturbed and outraged that some of Turkey’s leading human rights defenders, including the director of Amnesty International Turkey, should have been detained so blatantly without cause.”
He added, “This is a grotesque abuse of power and highlights the precarious situation facing human rights activists in the country.”
According to Amnesty, this is the first time in the group’s history that a director and chairman from the same country office have been detained simultaneously.
Amnesty has campaigned on Mr. Erdogan’s behalf in the past, after Mr. Erdogan was given a jail term in 1997 for reciting a provocative poem.
