Oxford Roiled by Invitation to Far-Right German Politician
OXFORD, England — As right-wing leaders continue to rise globally, so too has the question of whether they should be heard on prestigious Western platforms.
In September, under immense pressure, The New Yorker rescinded its invitation to Stephen K. Bannon, the right-wing populist and former chief strategist to President Trump, to speak at its annual festival.
A similar controversy is unfolding at the University of Oxford, where the Oxford Union — the famed debate society — has invited Alice Weidel, the leader of the right-wing Alternative for Germany party, or AfD, to speak next Wednesday.
Ms. Weidel’s impending visit has prompted significant backlash. Oxford’s Student Union has voted to condemn the event, planning for a mass protest is underway, and an open letter calling for her invitation to be rescinded has garnered more than 100 signatures, including those of Oxford faculty members, local politicians and a member of Parliament.
“This is a thoughtless and ill-advised invitation,” said Paul Betts, a professor of European history at St. Antony’s College, who signed the open letter. “Her party’s race-baiting, anti-Muslim politics has no place in a city which prides itself on its diversity and hostility to extremisms of all kinds.”
Anneliese Dodds, who represents Oxford East in Parliament and signed the open letter, said in a news release that “the Oxford Union should be aware that this move will lessen its standing in our city as a venue for democratic debate and tolerance.”
The AfD, little known just a few years ago, is now the third-largest political party in the German Parliament, and its support continues to surge. Last Sunday, nearly 13 percent of voters in Hesse, a German state, cast their ballots for the party, securing the AfD seats in all 16 of Germany’s state parliaments for the first time.
Known for its anti-Muslim and anti-immigrant positions, Alternative for Deutschland has brought far-right views back into the German mainstream. In August, thousands of far-right marchers staged a violent protest in the German city of Chemnitz. Police largely stood by as demonstrators flashed Nazi salutes and threatened dark-skinned onlookers.
Ms. Weidel, the party leader, has called Chancellor Angela Merkel “insane” and said that Germany “will be destroyed” because of her immigration policies. In 2015, Ms. Merkel admitted nearly one million refugees into Germany, a decision that contributed greatly to the rise of Europe’s far-right parties and began a steady decline in her political standing.
With Ms. Weidel’s appearance at Oxford still a week away, some influential members of the Oxford community have come to the Union’s defense.
“I take the classic liberal position that it’s better to have the open debate, have them be challenged, and then often that ends up demolishing and exposing their position much more effectively than anything else,” said Timothy Garton Ash, a European historian at St. Antony’s and one of the world’s leading public intellectuals.
The hourlong event will include a brief speech by Ms. Weidel, 20 minutes of questioning by the Oxford Union’s president, Stephen Horvath, and 20 minutes of questioning by the audience. The Union has already contracted additional security for the event, Mr. Horvath said, and will consider canceling the event only if Ms. Weidel herself decides to withdraw or if the police instruct the Union to do so for security reasons.
Mr. Garton Ash added that just as he supports hosting Ms. Weidel so long as she is “challenged rigorously,” he also supports community members who choose to protest the event.
Already, more than 550 people have expressed interest online in attending a demonstration against Ms. Weidel’s appearance. Ian McKendrick, an officer of Stand Up Against Racism, one of the groups organizing Wednesday’s demonstration, said protesters would congregate outside the Oxford Union. Their goal, Mr. McKendrick said, is both to “demoralize racists” and “embarrass the Oxford Union” for extending such an irresponsible invitation.
“Inviting her to speak was a gross mistake,” added Kate Douglas, an officer of Unite Against Fascism, another of the groups organizing the demonstration. “It’s giving her a platform. It’s making her views more mainstream and acceptable, and we know what will follow: race hate, racist attacks and the legitimization of racist views.”
The United States has seen a similar debate about featuring incendiary figures on prominent platforms, including the Alt-Right leader Richard Spencer and Mr. Bannon. In September, when it was announced that Mr. Bannon would speak at The New Yorker’s annual ideas festival, other participants pulled out of the event. Under immense pressure, David Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker, withdrew Mr. Bannon’s invitation.
“I’ve thought this through and talked to colleagues  —  and I’ve reconsidered. I’ve changed my mind. There is a better way to do this,” Mr. Remnick wrote in a memo to his staff.
The leaders of the Oxford Union, however, say they have no intention of canceling Ms. Weidel’s speech.
“We consider our invitations carefully. We firmly believe in free speech. That is not going to change because some student activists with very small mandates condemn us,” said Mr. Horvath, the group’s president. “We always seek to invite politicians in major European democracies who are gathering steam and have a certain degree of prominence.”
Chris Patten, the chancellor of the University of Oxford, declined to comment on Ms. Weidel’s visit. A university spokeswoman, Julia Paolitto, noted only that the Oxford Union is an entirely independent organization and that, as a result, Oxford does not take a position on its speakers.
This is not the first time the Oxford Union has ignited a debate over inviting right-wing leaders into its chambers. In 1999, on the advice of the police, the Union canceled a debate featuring John Tyndall, then the chairman of the far-right British National Party. And in 2007, hundreds protested a debate that included Nick Griffin, Tyndall’s successor as BNP chairman, and David Irving, a discredited historian.
