PRINCES HIGHWAY, Australia — Clinton Pryor had already walked 4,780 kilometers, or nearly 3,000 miles, by the time I met up with him Thursday morning on a country road between Sydney and Melbourne.
Mr. Pryor, an Aboriginal activist from Australia’s west coast, was starting his 310th day on foot to protest the treatment of Indigenous Australians, and he seemed anxious to get going.
He took a final drag off a cigarette.
“Ready, guys?” he said, looking toward his support crew — grandpas with long white beards, one driving a white station wagon barefoot, the other astride a bike.
His girlfriend, Kerry-Lee Coulthard, who met Mr. Pryor when he passed through her hometown in central Australia, eyed the road ahead.
And with that, Mr. Pryor’s Walk for Justice continued.
“We’re doing this for the grass-roots people,” he said, about two kilometers into the walk. “A lot of people are not being heard.”
Mr. Pryor, 27, with a knee brace on one leg, said he started out his trek from Perth to Canberra to raise awareness about two specific issues: homelessness among Indigenous Australians, an issue he has experienced firsthand, and the forced closing of remote Aboriginal communities by the government, which he has been protesting since at least 2014.
Over time, though, he said his mission has evolved to reflect what First Peoples have told him they were struggling with. Suicide. Poverty. Racist policing. Corruption. Lack of rights to land, lack of work, and perhaps most of all, Mr. Pryor says, lack of inclusion in decisions made by the government.
“This is a civil rights movement,” he says. “The power should be shared.”
He talked about the importance of a treaty, which he says should have been signed 229 years ago when the first European settlers landed in Australia. He emphasized that services for Aboriginal communities, including access to water and education, needed to be expanded. And at times, he seemed frustrated with the whole idea of politics, declaring, “We just want things done right.”
Sovereignty came up often, as it has in other contexts. This year, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders agreed on a set of demands, the Uluru Statement from the Heart, which called for First Australians to be given greater control over their lives by creating a permanent representative body enshrined in the Constitution.
Last week at Garma, a meeting of Indigenous leaders and chiefs of political, business and industry groups, the call for representation was repeated. But Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, who was there, resisted those demands.
“An all-or-nothing approach often results in nothing,” he said.
Neither Mr. Pryor nor others seem to have broken through with their message. The Walk for Justice has been covered sporadically by the local news media, and Mr. Pryor’s following on Facebook and Twitter has not yet forced Canberra to pay attention.
“Our parliamentarians struggle to respond to anything that comes from the Aboriginal community,” said Megan Davis, a Cobble Cobble woman from Queensland and a law professor at the University of New South Wales who is a member of the Referendum Council that advises lawmakers on how to advance recognition for Indigenous Australians.
“It’s shocking that in 2017 you still have to be arguing that point — that we should actually be at the table when you’re discussing our issues.”
Mr. Pryor relies on other forms of encouragement.
Just after noon, a man parked his truck across the road, ran to Mr. Pryor and handed him a few 20-dollar bills. “Doing good, brother. You’re making us all proud,” he said before dashing away.
When it started to rain a few minutes later, Noonie Raymond, a member of Mr. Pryor’s support team, delivered large umbrellas, one for him, one for Ms. Coulthard.
Mr. Raymond was on a mountain bike. Brett Burnell drove the station wagon, a 1999 Ford Falcon packed with supplies and signed by dozens of well-wishers during the journey.
With their matching shirts and long, gray beards, Mr. Raymond and Mr. Burnell looked like brothers; they were hard to tell apart.
Both men, longtime activists without Aboriginal roots said they joined Mr. Pryor to help right the wrongs of their country’s past.
“We’re learning our history, which we weren’t taught growing up,” Mr. Raymond said.
The challenges have varied. The Ford Falcon, bought for 1,300 Australian dollars ($1,030), was a replacement for a Mercedes van that Mr. Burnell started out with, but crashed after drifting asleep at the wheel. In the desert, Mr. Pryor said, they went two days without water, and at one point, Mr. Pryor’s left leg swelled with fluid, forcing him to walk 50 kilometers in excruciating pain.
As a group — with around a half-dozen team members on the road and helping with social media and organization — they’ve been pushing ahead through donations.
Mr. Pryor has raised a little more than 33,000 Australian dollars ($26,000) through a GoFundMe page, and gifts of food, money, car parts and the occasional place to stay have also helped.
One especially fortunate gift of lodging led to Mr. Pryor meeting Ms. Coulthard.
Six months ago, he was staying in Port Augusta, a small city north of Adelaide, when he noticed a woman hanging laundry next door. It was Ms. Coulthard.
“He must have been stalking me for 10 minutes,” she said, her usual shyness giving way to humor. “He came up to me. Then we spent three hours talking.”
Asked what they talked about, she chuckled. “He asked about my dreams,” she said.
She told him how she’d always hoped to help the homeless. She told him she’d always hoped to visit Hawaii.
Before long, Ms. Coulthard, 30, was traveling to see Mr. Pryor between long stretches of walking. She overcame her fear of flying. And he changed, too.
“I stopped drinking,” he said. “All because of her.”
Mr. Pryor’s feet sometimes fall behind schedule.
Admitting he was a bit slowed down by Ms. Coulthard, who doesn’t usually join him, he jumped in a car just before 2 p.m. to drive to a march in Nowra. (His team marked where he’d stopped so he could return and start again later.)
At a riverside park, dozens of people gathered. Sausages cooked on a grill. A police officer with white face paint on his cheeks waved cars in as Paul Mcleod, 60, an elder whose mother was part of the Yuin nation, lit a ceremonial fire and performed a traditional dance.
“All of our people walk with him, in the spirit, if not in the flesh,” Mr. Mcleod told the crowd in English and in local languages. “It means a lot. To all of us.”
Mr. Pryor, his face also painted, also spoke. He identified himself as a Wajuk, Balardung, Kija and a Yulparitja man from the West, and most of what he argued for sounded similar to what he’d told me on the walk.
But he also seemed to struggle with how to explain his purpose. At one point, he apologized for losing his train of thought. He said he was tired from walking.
He looked 10 years younger, surrounded by men, women and children still seeking equality hundreds of years after colonization, on behalf of ancient peoples who have inhabited Australia for at least 65,000 years. Earlier in the day, he had asked me how to spell a few common words — Europe, for one — and admitted that he’s struggled with illiteracy.
By the end of his speech, though, he found his footing. In 2004, Michael Long trekked from Melbourne to Canberra, 650 kilometers, to put Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people back on the national agenda. More than a decade later, with hundreds of kilometers to go, Mr. Pryor cast his own walk as an act of resilience.
“I’ve been walking for 10 months,” he said. “It’s about telling everyone to get back up and keep fighting.”
