Oregon farmer furious with deputy who shot and killed his $1,200 goat — but police claim self-defense
   Baaaad situation. 
   An Oregon farmer is livid after a deputy sheriff fatally shot his $1,200 escaped goat, but law enforcement officials claim it was self-defense. 
   Matt Minnick, whose farm is in northwest Portland, discovered his male breeding goat, Volt, was missing earlier this week. 
   Deputies later called him to a nearby housing development. 
   "When I walked up, he was right here, there was one officer right here," Minnick told local Fox affiliate KPTV. "The goat was there huffin' and puffin'." 
   It was then Minnick discovered Volt was bleeding from a gunshot wound. 
   "And they say, 'Yeah, it was either me or the goat' and I said, 'Man, there are 7-year-old kids that deal with these goats. Infants that deal with these,'" he told the news channel. 
   Volt likely escaped through a fence installed more than two years ago when the housing development was built, Minnick said. 
   "Goats are escape artists, and I'm the farmer. I see this as partly my fault because I didn't keep a closer eye on my perimeter," he told KPTV. 
   Minnick said Volt's breed, native to New Zealand, has a notoriously calm demeanor. 
   But the Washington County Sheriff's Office says otherwise. 
   Deputies came across a herd of goats on Sunday and started rounding them up, sheriff spokesman Jeff Talbot told the Oregonian. 
   Volt, however, was rowdy, especially with one particular officer. 
   He kept his head down and his roughly 18-inch horns pointed at the deputy, the police report cited by the Oregonian said. 
   Volt kept charging the deputy and rammed a tree. He then went for the lawman's groin, according to the Oregonian, and he grabbed Volt's horn to pull him out of the way. 
   The goat kept cornering the deputy, who felt he had no other option but to shoot Volt, the Oregonian reported. 
   He was also worried about the safety of others around him, according to reports. 
   Minnick told KPTV he plans to file a claim for damages with Washington County as well as find a new breeding goat. 
   "It's tough, it's tough," he said.   
