Teen marijuana use not independently linked with IQ decline
   Teen marijuana use is not independently linked with adverse changes in intelligence quotient or executive functioning, according to longitudinal data published online ahead of print in the journal "Addiction". 
   A team of investigators from the United States and the United Kingdom evaluated whether marijuana use is directly associated with changes over time in neuropsychological performance in a nationally representative cohort of adolescent twins. Authors reported that "family background factors," but not the use of cannabis negatively impacted adolescents' cognitive performance. 
   Related Story: A Guide For Talking To Your Teens About Marijuana 
   They wrote: "[W]e found that youth who used cannabis … had lower IQ at age 18, but there was little evidence that cannabis use was associated with IQ decline from age 12 to 18. Moreover, although cannabis use was associated with lower IQ and poorer executive functions at age 18, these associations were generally not apparent within pairs of twins from the same family, suggesting that family background factors explain why adolescents who use cannabis perform worse on IQ and executive function tests." 
   Investigators concluded, "Short-term cannabis use in adolescence does not appear to cause IQ decline or impair executive functions, even when cannabis use reaches the level of dependence." 
   Their findings are consistent with those of several other studies — including those here, here, here, and here — finding that cannabis use alone during adolescence does not appear to have a significant, direct adverse effect on intelligence quotient. 
   Related Story: How To Talk To Your Children About Legal Marijuana 
   A widely publicized New Zealand study published in 2012 in "The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences" reported that the persistent use of cannabis from adolescence to adulthood was associated with slightly lower IQ by age 38. However, a follow up review of the data published later in the same journal suggested that the observed changes were likely due to socioeconomic differences, not the subjects' use of cannabis.   
