Deadly Airstrikes in Syria Raise Fears of New Offensive
LONDON — Syrian and Russian warplanes carried out dozens of airstrikes on Syria’s last rebel-held province on Tuesday, apparently ignoring a warning from President Trump and raising concerns that a large offensive against the densely populated area had begun.
The strikes on Idlib Province, in northwestern Syria along the border with Turkey, came as diplomats scrambled to avert what a United Nations official said could be a blood bath.
Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, has vowed to fight until he regains control of the entire country, and his Russian and Iranian allies have been hinting that the battle for Idlib was imminent. About three million people live in the province, including more than a million who were displaced from elsewhere in Syria during the seven-year war.
The province also has an array of rebel forces including jihadists associated with Al Qaeda, which Syria and its allies say they must get rid of.
American officials have warned Russia and Iran against military operations in Idlib.
“The Russians and Iranians would be making a grave humanitarian mistake to take part in this potential human tragedy,” President Trump wrote on Twitter on Monday. “Hundreds of thousands of people could be killed. Don’t let that happen!”
Gen. Joseph Dunford, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters on Tuesday that “we can expect a humanitarian catastrophe” if military operations begin in Idlib.
And on Tuesday the White House threatened unspecified military intervention if Mr. Assad’s forces used chemical weapons.
“Let us be clear,” a White House statement said. “It remains our firm stance that if President Bashar al-Assad chooses to again use chemical weapons, the United States and its allies will respond swiftly and appropriately.”
The fight for Idlib may be the last major battle between the Syrian government and the rebels that rose up against it in 2011, but is not likely to end the conflict. Even if the government retakes Idlib, about a quarter of the country would remain outside of its control. Much of the country’s infrastructure lies in ruins, and millions of people have been displaced.
Syria’s allies pushed back on the American warnings on Tuesday, with Iran saying that any military operation would be planned to avoid human suffering and Russia accusing the United States of lacking a “comprehensive approach” to ending the conflict.
Dimitry Peskov, a Kremlin spokesman, called Idlib “a hornets’ nest of terrorists” in comments to reporters, adding that the American warnings did not take into account the “dangerous, negative potential” of the situation.
“We know that Syria’s armed forces are preparing to resolve this problem,” Mr. Peskov said.
Tuesday’s airstrikes shattered the relative quiet in the province in recent weeks. But it remained unclear whether they marked the start of a wider government effort to seize the area.
Most of the strikes targeted the western edge of the rebel-held area, killing 12 people including five children, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which monitors the conflict from Britain through contacts on the ground. It said Syrian and Russian planes carried out the strikes.
The looming offensive has accelerated diplomacy between Russia and Iran, which back the Syrian government, and Turkey, which has provided aid to rebels in Idlib and fears that new violence will send refugees streaming across its border.
The Turkish foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo agreed Tuesday that “that any Assad regime military offensive in Idlib would be an unacceptable, reckless escalation of the conflict in Syria,” the State Department said.
A pro-government newspaper reported Monday that Turkey was sending more troops into Syria, including reinforcements along the Idlib border.
Representatives of Iran, Russia and Turkey are scheduled to meet in Tehran on Friday to discuss the situation. The United Nations Security Council will also meet on Friday to discuss Idlib.
The United States and Russia have traded conflicting threats on the subject of chemical weapons, raising fears that one side or the other may be planning to deploy them.
The Syrian government has used chemical weapons numerous times throughout the conflict, including banned substances and commercial chemicals like chlorine, against rebel-held districts. The United States has warned Syria several times that it would respond to any chemical weapons use in Idlib.
Russia, which moved 26 warships and 36 planes, including strategic bombers, into the Mediterranean over the weekend, has accused Syrian rebels of planning a chemical attack against civilians in Idlib as a pretext for an American retaliation against Syrian government forces.
The United Nations special envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, called on Russian and Turkish leaders to talk to each other before the meeting on Friday to avert “a blood bath” in Idlib. Talks between Russia and Turkey “hold the key” to a nonmilitary solution in Idlib, he told reporters in Geneva.
General Dunford also urged further talks, as well as “more precise counterterrorism operations, as opposed to large-scale conventional operations” to weed out an estimated 20,000 to 30,000 militants in the province.
