Mattis Beseeches Officials at Singapore Conference to ‘Bear With Us’
SINGAPORE — Jim Mattis came to the security conference in Singapore with a clear message: The United States would stand up for its allies, explain why North Korea’s nuclear program was a growing danger and generally uphold the international order.
“We have a deep and abiding commitment to reinforcing the rules-based international order,” Mr. Mattis, the United States defense secretary, said in a major policy address here on Saturday.
But the tables were turned on Mr. Mattis by President Trump’s decision this week to withdraw from the Paris climate accord. Suddenly, Mr. Mattis found himself as a representative of an outlier nation — at least in the eyes of many of the Asian officials and international policy experts who filled a packed hall here.
No sooner had Mr. Mattis finished his address than he was thrust into the uncomfortable position of defending White House policy decisions on trade, climate science and burden-sharing in a spirited question-and-answer session.
The head of an Australian policy institute, Michael Fullilove, wanted to know if the United States, which shelved the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement and withdrew from the climate accord, was bringing about the destruction of the very global order Mr. Mattis was championing.
It was only the first question about the America’s new role in the world, which led Mr. Mattis to loyally defend Mr. Trump while trying to soothe anxieties. Trying to reassure his audience, Mr. Mattis argued that the American public had generally accepted that the country has global responsibilities despite occasional frustrations about the burden.
“To quote a British observer of us from some years ago, bear with us,” Mr. Mattis said. “Once we have exhausted all possible alternatives, the Americans will do the right thing,” he continued, invoking a famous quote often attributed to Winston Churchill.
“So we will still be there, and we will be there with you,” he added.
At another point, Mr. Mattis implored his audience to understand that just because the United States had backed away from the multilateral Pacific trade agreement “does not mean we are turning our back” on the prospect of negotiating bilateral trade agreements.
Mr. Mattis received some support Friday night from Australia’s prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, who appeared to anticipate the mood of many participants at this annual conference organized by the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a research center based in London.
“Some have been concerned with withdrawal from the TPP and now from the Paris climate change agreement herald a U.S. withdrawal from global leadership,” Mr. Turnbull said. “While these decisions are disappointing, we should take care not to rush to interpret an intent to engage on different terms as one not to engage at all.”
Yet within a region that has many coastal cities that climate scientists say may be endangered by climate change, and whose economic growth depends heavily on trade, Mr. Mattis was put on the defensive.
These were not the themes Mr. Mattis had hoped would dominate the session. The defense secretary underscored that the United States would stand with allies like Japan and South Korea — nations that have been anxious about Mr. Trump’s campaign talk about pulling back from security commitments in the region. The Pacific region, he asserted, is a “priority region” for the United States.
North Korea was a growing worry, he said, because it had “increased the pace and the scope” of its nuclear and missile programs.
“The United States regards the threat from North Korea as a clear and present danger,” said Mr. Mattis, who stressed that Washington hoped to resolve the dispute through diplomatic means.
Mr. Mattis also signaled that he did not intend to take a more relaxed view of China’s territorial claims to the South China Sea in return for any help it might provide in pressing North Korea to curtail its nuclear and missile programs.
China’s “artificial island construction and indisputable militarization of facilities on features in international waters undermine regional stability,” said Mr. Mattis, who stressed that the United States would not use partners as “bargaining chips.”
Mr. Mattis also expressed concern over the militants in the Philippines who are linked to the Islamic State. If the international community did not act now to prevent this threat from growing, “it will place long-term regional security at risk,” he said.
Mr. Mattis sought to demonstrate the United States’ commitment to the Pacific region by noting that 60 percent of American Navy ships — and soon 60 percent of United States tactical aviation — were assigned there.
As if to underscore that point, two American aircraft carriers have been holding exercises in the waters off the Korean Peninsula, the first time joint carrier operations have been carried out in the sea between Korea and Japan since the late 1990s.
In his speech and during the question period, Mr. Mattis did not mention Mr. Trump’s decision to withdraw from the global climate change agreement.
But in an attempt to ease concerns about the White House disengaging from the United States’ traditional role as a global power, he argued that Mr. Trump’s first trip had been to the Middle East and that he stood with NATO allies “100 percent.”
Seeking to avoid politics, Mr. Mattis, a voracious reader of history, said the American public had long been conflicted about the burdens of an international role. But then the defense secretary made clear where he stood, and what he thought many Americans still believed, too.
“What a crummy world, if we all retreat inside our own borders,” he said. “Like it or not, we are part of the world.”
