Balfour Declaration of Support for Jewish Homeland Still Divisive at 100
JERUSALEM — It was the moment of conception of what would become the State of Israel — or it was the original sin in which Israel was conceived.
The Balfour Declaration, the pivotal, 67-word assurance by the British foreign secretary that promised support for “the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people,” turned 100 on Thursday, meeting with tributes in Jerusalem and London, and tear gas in Bethlehem.
Demonstrators marched in nearly every major West Bank city. In Ramallah, thousands of flag-waving Palestinian Authority employees, Fatah youth guard members and schoolchildren, streamed to the mausoleum of the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat and then to Al-Manarah Square, chanting “Balfour falls” and “We will not give up our right to exist.”
In Bethlehem, where protesters on Wednesday burned an effigy of Arthur James Balfour, the declaration’s author, and then beat it with their shoes, demonstrators on Thursday were met for the second straight day with tear gas canisters and rubber bullets fired by Israeli soldiers.
Dueling academic conferences at the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities in central Jerusalem and at the Palestinian National Theater in East Jerusalem offered sharply different takes on the document’s meaning, genesis and historical consequences. The former emphasized World War I-era geopolitics and international law, and the latter keyed on imperialism and racism.
As much as the Balfour Declaration became a cornerstone of the creation of Israel three decades later, it also earned the undying enmity of Palestine’s Arab population — which it referred to obliquely as “the existing non-Jewish communities of Palestine.”
At the British Consulate in East Jerusalem, a group of teenage Palestinian schoolgirls delivered hundreds of letters to Prime Minister Theresa May as part of a campaign, led by the Palestinian Authority president Mahmoud Abbas, to get Britain to “make it right” and recognize a Palestinian state based on the pre-1967 borders.
Mr. Abbas has been demanding lately that Britain apologize for the Balfour Declaration. No apology is expected, though the artist-satirist Banksy arranged for a look-alike of Queen Elizabeth II to offer one, along with cake, on Wednesday in Bethlehem.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was to ring in the occasion at a dinner on Thursday in London with Mrs. May, arranged by Baron Jacob Rothschild, whose great-uncle was the recipient of Balfour’s famous letter.
For a 100-year-old artifact, the declaration remains very much a live issue between Israelis and Palestinians, as well as between the Israeli left and right. P
