Critics Scoff as Kremlin Erects Monument to the Repressed
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin on Monday called the unveiling of the first Kremlin-promoted monument to the victims of political repression an important step toward preventing oppression in Russia, but critics accused the government of hypocrisy given the continued lack of political rights.
“We and our successors should remember the tragedy of repressions and the reasons that caused them,” Mr. Putin said during the rainy evening ceremony. The memory serves “as a powerful admonition against their repetition.”
The Russian president, who ordered the construction of the monument, the “Wall of Sorrow,” three years ago, described political repression as a crime, but stressed that future generations should remember the victims without bringing the country to renewed confrontation by “settling scores.”
About 40 critics, many of them veterans of the struggle for human rights in the Soviet Union, accused the Kremlin in a petition they released on Facebook of trying to whitewash the present.
“The current Russian government, in sponsoring the opening of the monument, is trying to pretend that political repression is a thing long since past,” the petition read. “We state with certainty that Russia’s current political prisoners are worthy of our help and attention no less than the victims of the Soviet regime are worthy of our memory and respect.”
Among those who signed were famous Soviet-era dissidents, including Aleksandr Podrabinek, Pavel Litvinov and Vladimir Bukovsky, as well as Mustafa Dzhemilev, a longstanding Tatar leader in Crimea who was exiled after opposing Russia’s 2014 annexation.
Others, however, called the new monument an important step.
Elena B. Zhemkova, chief operating officer of Memorial, a beleaguered organization founded to establish a record of the repressed, called a state-backed national monument significant.
“When this monument is unveiled by the top figure in the state, being created on behalf of the state,” she said at a news conference before the unveiling, “it will mean our state says: ‘Terror is a crime. Mass terror, unfair murders of individuals are a crime, and it is bad.’”
Roman Romanov, the director of the Gulag Museum, which helped raise money for the memorial, said there had been frequent struggles over remembering. The museum itself has been picketed by opponents who label the entire Gulag experience “fiction.”
“The fact that it is taking place by presidential decree and it is supported by ordinary citizens, who gave money for the monument, indicates to me that this is a new point of reckoning,” Mr. Romanov said.
The monument was built on an old parking lot on a prominent crossroads in the center of Moscow, but it is distant from pedestrian traffic. It sits at the end of a street named after Andrei Sakharov, the Soviet nuclear physicist, Nobel laureate and human rights campaigner.
The placement of the dark, shadowy bronze sculpture at an ordinary intersection was meant to emphasize that repression could happen anyplace, said Georgy Frangulyan, the artist who spent two years creating it.
The central part consists of a curved wall, almost 100 feet long and 20 feet high, made up of what appear to be h
