Turkey Halts Syrian Incursion, Hours After Deal With Russia
AKCAKALE, Turkey — The Turkish Army halted its incursion into a Kurdish-run area of northern Syria on Wednesday morning, after a deal between the Turkish and Russian governments promised that Kurdish fighters would retreat from the Turkish-Syrian border.
In a statement, the Turkish defense ministry said it would not advance beyond an area of roughly 900 square miles that Turkish-led forces have seized from Kurdish control since invading the area two weeks ago.
“At this stage, there is no further need to conduct a new operation outside the present operation area,” the statement said.
The announcement followed an agreement on Tuesday night between President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir V. Putin, that significantly redrew the battle lines of the eight-year-old Syrian conflict.
The deal calls for Russian and Turkish troops to fill a military vacuum created by the sudden United States withdrawal from northern Syria this month, which left the Kurds, American allies, exposed to the Turkish offensive.
It allows the Syrian government, backed by Moscow, to re-establish dominance over a swath of the country that the Kurds have controlled. 
By Wednesday afternoon, Syrian government forces had begun to deploy to parts of the region for the first time in half a decade, Syrian state media reported. Russian troops were also filmed and photographed on the move in the same area.
Russia’s Defense Ministry said in a statement that its chief, Sergei Shoigu, had spoken by video conference with and the commander of the Syrian Democratic Forces, Mazlum Kobani. Mr. Shoigu told Mr. Kobani that Russian patrols would increase in the coming days, and that those and Syrian border guards would guarantee the safety of civilians in the border zone, according to the statement.
Under the terms of the deal, Kurdish fighters must retreat more than 20 miles from the Turkish border by Monday night. Turkish troops will be allowed more than six miles inside Syria to conduct joint patrols with Russian forces along the length of the border region, and Turkey will also be allowed to maintain oversight of a deeper pocket of land it has seized, which extends roughly 20 miles inside Syria.
