Israeli Student’s Use of Auschwitz Artifacts in an Art Exhibit Prompts a Furor
An Israeli college student has drawn a storm of criticism for using artifacts that she initially claimed were taken from the Auschwitz-Birkenau memorial site in Poland in an artwork for a college exhibit.
The student, Rotem Bides, told Israeli news outlets this week that she had collected the objects during five visits to the site of the former Nazi concentration camp in what is now southern Poland.
Images of the artwork posted to Ynetnews, an Israeli news outlet, showed shards of glass, a charred tin can, two spoons and a sign explaining the significance of the site and warning visitors not to remove anything from the grounds.
Ms. Bides said that her grandparents were Holocaust survivors — one grandfather was in Auschwitz — and that the art was intended to explore her personal history.
“I felt it was something I had to do,” she told Ynetnews. “Millions of people were murdered based on the moral laws of a certain country, under a certain regime. And if these are the laws, I can go there and act according to my own laws. The statement I’m making here is that laws are determined by humans, and that morality is something that changes from time to time and from culture to culture.”
Ms. Bides later told The New York Times that the items “are not from the Auschwitz camp and not from the Auschwitz museum, but from the nearby area,” but she declined to elaborate. The Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum is a sprawling site covering hundreds of acres.
The artwork was meant to be part of an exhibit starting on July 26 at Beit Berl College in Kfar Saba, a city near Tel Aviv, Israel. But the college removed it, according to a statement posted on its Facebook page, after reports circulated that it contained stolen artifacts. The college has recommended Ms. Bides for “disciplinary action” and said it “condemns the theft of items from any place, and certainly from an extermination camp.”
The college said Ms. Bides’s decision to use the materials in the piece came from “a lack of public sensitivity and a misunderstanding of its criminal significance.”
Ms. Bides may face more than just college discipline. Representatives of the Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum condemned the reported theft, and said in a Twitter message that her use of the artifacts was disrespectful.
Lukasz Lipinski, a press officer at the museum, said staff members were working with Polish prosecutors to ascertain whether the items were stolen from the site. The items did not appear to have come from any formal display, he said, but might have been picked up somewhere on the property.
“From the pictures, it is hard to tell,” Mr. Lipinski said. “Such things, you can find them on the grounds of Auschwitz-Birkenau.”
The site is protected under local and international historic preservation laws, and unauthorized removal of anything found on the grounds would violate those laws. The buildings and relics there are on the Unesco World Heritage List. 
“These things are of special value for Polish culture,” Mr. Lipinski said. “Anything taken from the museum is part of the history of the site. It is against the law, of course, to take anything.”
The memorial site has had problems with theft. Most notably, the iron sign over one entrance, bearing the motto “Arbeit Macht Frei” — “work makes you free” — was stolen in 2009; it was recovered in pieces three days later. Earlier this year, two British teenagers were fined for stealing small items from the grounds during a school trip; an Israeli couple were convicted of taking home rusted cutlery they found in the mud at the site in 2011.
