Saudi Arabia Releases Woman Arrested for Wearing Skirt in Public
AMMAN, Jordan — The police in Saudi Arabia have released without charge a woman who was arrested after videos appeared online of her strolling through a historic neighborhood in a short skirt and crop top, violating the country’s strict social codes.
The brief videos, downloaded and reposted from Snapchat, spread quickly on social media in the conservative Islamic kingdom, setting off heated debates between those who criticized her for breaking Saudi rules and others who defended her for doing something considered normal elsewhere in the world.
Saudi news media reported on Tuesday that the woman, known only by her given name, Khulood, had been arrested and turned over to prosecutors. She was released a few hours later after questioning, and was not charged with a crime, according to a statement released Wednesday by the Saudi Information Ministry. The woman had said the videos were shared without her knowledge.
Saudi Arabia’s conservative culture and strict interpretation of Islam make the country restrictive of women’s rights. In many legal contexts, Saudi women have a similar status to minors. Women cannot marry, travel abroad or get certain kinds of medical treatment without the permission of a male “guardian,” often a father, husband or even a son.
In public, Saudi women are expected to wear billowing black gowns that hide their figures and to cover their hair. Some also cover their faces — which is why the images of a young woman exposing her legs and midriff caused so much noise.
Some Saudi women are pushing for more flexibility, as an increasing number are graduating from college and getting jobs. It is not uncommon in Saudi cities to meet women in mixed offices with their hair uncovered.
As part of a move to restructure the Saudi economy, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman has spoken of creating more opportunities for women. Many Saudis suspect that he could be the leader to finally give women the right to drive.
