Australia Diary collects reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. Want to share your story, photo, poem or video? Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com.
Names of places in Australia, like Aussies themselves, are brutally honest and steeped in rich, witty humor. 
Who wonders how the early explorers were feeling in Misery Bay or on Cape Tribulation? Captain Bligh and his crew found safe harbor on Restoration Island. The Pink Roadhouse on the Oodnadatta Track in South Australia is exactly that: a roadhouse painted pink.
Frank Hann found Lake Disappointment while searching for fresh water in the Pilbara region of Western Australia in 1897. When it isn’t dry, which isn’t often, it’s saltier than the oceans.
My personal favorite, Useless Loop Road, is a dirt track out on a peninsula near Shark Bay (guess what’s in the bay) in Western Australia; it gets to the water eventually, but is, well, useless, really.
Indigenous names, which often express love of country and connection to the land, often tie up white people’s tongues. For example, the road that connects the new highway to Mandurah just south of Perth is called Mandjoogoordap Drive. Say it really fast a couple of times and you might get it. In the Noongar language it means “meeting place of the heart.” Oodnadatta is an adaptation of “utnadata,” an Arrente word meaning “mulga blossom.”
The Aussie tongue — of white settlement at least — seems to prefer being firmly planted in the Aussie cheek. Consider, for example, the application of the word “great.”
The Great Southern Highway weaves through country towns from Perth to Albany. A slow, two-lane road with a nominal shoulder, it bears no resemblance to the superhighways of the United States. 
The Great Eastern Highway, four lanes of traffic with streetlights and crosswalks in Perth, narrows to two lanes long before it ends in Kalgoorlie 600 kilometers to the east.
I suppose these roads are considerable in degree, power and intensity. Compared with the back roads, where there is sometimes a single lane of bitumen (put your outside tires in the dirt if you encounter oncoming traffic), one might describe them as first rate. But “great”? 
Then again, perhaps the Aussies are having a go. After all, taking the piss, of themselves and everyone else, is a national sport here.
But let me tell you about one that helped me understand our naming ways: the Great Central Road. It’s one of seven linked roads that form the Outback Way, a four-wheel-drive adventure from Cairns, on the northern coast of Queensland, through Alice Springs in the middle, to Perth on the western shore. 
The most direct route across Australia, it’s been dubbed “Australia’s longest shortcut.”
The road is open all year, but unless harsh daytime conditions that cause exhaustion and dehydration — or sudden heavy rains that render the road impassable for days — don’t worry you, it’s best to travel between April and October. 
Feral animals, especially camels, are present all year.
We chose the Great Central Road on our way home from Alice Springs. After refueling at the petrol station in Yulara, the resort base for visitors to Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park (also known as Ayers Rock), the ranger at the gate shook his head and waived the park fee when we explained we were driving through to Perth.
Jarring vibrations, intermittently suspended by loose sand slides and pothole plunges, shook the truck; red bull dust seeped through closed vents. 
The Petermann Ranges, made of granite and sandstone, emerged on the horizon. Ernest Giles, the first European to visit here, named them after the geographer August Petermann. 
But there was so much more. 
Between the ranges, acacia shrubs dotted the low-lying hills that gave way to sand dunes spiked with spinifex. We saw no one for hours. Anangu Pitjantjatjara land — Anangu means people who belong to the earth — swallowed us up whole. 
We knew the outback was vast and remote; we were well prepared in terms of spare parts, permits and fuel stops. But the word “great” wasn’t nearly big enough for the raw energy of the bush or the weighty power of its night sky. 
A deep love and respect of this land, one shared by all Australians, was born in me. That, I’ve come to believe, is what black and white fellas, each in their own way, are expressing with their place names — love and respect for this great land.
