A Reading List on Race, in Australia and America
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter, reflecting the experience (and quirks) of our Australia bureau chief, a Yank who’s convinced he has the best job in journalism. Sign up to get it by email and forward it to friends if you get the urge.
______
The dynamics of race and equality are always complicated, but for both the United States and Australia, the past, present and future continue to be shaped by how these issues are discussed and handled across society.
What does self-determination look like for those who are not part of the white majority? What does a country owe to those it’s discriminated against — and what are the best ways to move forward toward true equality and unity?
These are just a few of the questions that will likely come up in a pair of conversations I’ll be moderating Sunday in Melbourne and on Monday in Sydney. Both will feature Nikole Hannah-Jones, an award-winning New York Times reporter who has covered race and segregation for most of her career.
She’s coming all the way from Brooklyn — and she’ll be joined by the actress Shareena Clanton at the National Gallery of Victoria on Sunday at 7 p.m. (Get tickets here with the discount code NGVNYtimes.)
On Monday, we’ll be with Prof. Megan Davis, the Aboriginal scholar and activist, at the University of New South Wales, starting at 6:30 p.m. Free tickets should still be available.
The goal of these discussions — and all the events that our Australia bureau has been involved with — is to extend The New York Times journalism experience beyond the page or screen; and to broaden and personalize our coverage of important topics that matter to Australia and the world.
A lot of work goes into these efforts, for our small bureau and our partners, so this week I figured I’d open up the process and share a few of the articles and essays that we’re reading and sharing as we prepare.
What’s below is by no means a comprehensive reading list; it’s quite abbreviated, in fact, and errs toward the current, the varied and toward word counts that can be consumed in a single sitting. Read as much or as little as you can, and bring your questions to the events if you’re coming.
The End of the Postracial MythBy Nikole Hannah-Jones
The Long Road to UluruBy Megan Davis
A Special Screening of ‘Black Panther’ for Indigenous and African YouthBy Shareena Clanton
The Many Faces of RacismBy Tim Soutphommasane
The Politics of IdentityBy Stan Grant
Now here are some additional stories from this week, about Australia and the world.
As always, you can share your thoughts in our NYT Australia Facebook group, or by emailing us at nytaustralia@nytimes.com. And forward this newsletter to friends too!
______
I fell in love with the World Cup traveling through South America in 1998; for me, no event is more global, thrilling and surprising — not even the Olympics.
This time around, Rory Smith, our international soccer columnist, is the one to follow. He’s already breaking down the brackets for us and guiding us through reaction to Russia’s hosting capabilities.
Also don’t forget to sign up for our World Cup newsletter, Offsides, to keep up with all the games and arguments.
______
Let’s assume you’ve already read a boatload of news about the North Korea summit in Singapore. Here’s some fresh analysis to go with that.
The reaction from American allies in Asia: mixed reviews and anxiety, mostly.
Is President Trump really just relying on his personal bond with Kim Jong-un to deliver disarmament? Looks like he is.
Or maybe the Trump approach to the world, allies and enemies included, is simply a businessman’s “mercantile perspective.”
And for those eager for more, here’s where to find all our North Korea coverage.
______
I usually link straight to our headlines here, but I’ve gotten a few emails from people whose eyes speed right over the links, so I’m returning to my old conversational tone.
I’ll be honest, we’re a little light on coverage lately due to vacations and travel for bigger stories, but remember when I promised more culture coverage?
Along those lines, here’s a terrific Tim Winton profile. We’ll have some Dark Mofo coverage later this week as well.
We also got stuck into (sort of) Australia’s influence in the United States. Check out Maine’s copying Australia’s voting system. And Liz Cambage, a 6-foot-8 Australian, is single-handedly shifting the balance of power in the W.N.B.A.
Closer to home, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said he would issue a formal apology to thousands of survivors of abuse that happened at schools and religious institutions.
This week’s Australia Diary examined white and Indigenous names for Australian roads and places. (Ever been to Useless Loop Road?)
We also had a thoughtful Op-Ed from a former Miss ex-Yugoslavia, writing about beauty, feminism and identity in Melbourne and in pageantry worldwide.
Our New Zealand correspondent wrote about Matt Lauer’s getting to keep his ranch there, despite sexual misconduct allegations.
A freelancer in Vanuatu also wrote for us about officials pushing back against Australia’s concerns about a wharf built and financed by China.
______
Tacey Rychter, our audience editor, has become a fan of Comedy Central’s series “These New South Whales.”
Here’s her description of what to expect:
A collaboration by a group of Australian former child actors (think faces from “Round The Twist” and “H20: Just Add Water”), “These New South Whales” parodies Australia’s insider-y and blokey music industry, post-punk scene and inner-west life in an addictive, mockumentary-style web series.
For anyone who’s seen a gig at The Lansdowne, dealt with crap-talking A&R rep, or had anything to do with the Australian music industry, it’s fun to see that world reflected back and sent up. Yes it’s hyperlocal and insular – but if you’re in that niche audience, you’ll love it.
