China Says It Has Detained Rights Activist From Taiwan
BEIJING — A human rights advocate from Taiwan has been detained in China on suspicion of being a threat to national security, an official in Beijing said on Wednesday, adding to signs of an intensified clampdown on outsiders working with China’s beleaguered human rights lawyers and groups.
The activist, Lee Ming-cheh, went missing more than a week ago, after he took a flight from Taipei to Macau to cross into mainland China. His case had already ignited widespread news coverage in Taiwan, a self-governed island at odds with mainland China, which claims the island as its own territory. That unease appeared likely to grow after a Chinese official confirmed that Mr. Lee was being held on a highly serious charge.
Mr. Lee was “under investigation by the relevant authorities on suspicion of activities harmful to national security,” Ma Xiaoguang, a spokesman for the Chinese government’s Taiwan Affairs Office, said at a news conference in Beijing.
Mr. Ma did not detail what activities brought Mr. Lee under suspicion. But they probably involved his contacts in China, where he used social media to discuss Taiwan’s transition to democracy, visited friends about once a year, and delivered donations of books and money to the families of imprisoned human rights lawyers, according to his wife and to the director of the community college in Taiwan where he is employed.
Mr. Lee’s detention has added to signs that security authorities in China are increasingly vigilant against people from outside the mainland who meet with or help civic activists in the country. Some advocacy groups have linked the case to China’s introduction this year of a law regulating and limiting activities of overseas nongovernment organizations.
The detention “will definitely have a chilling effect on other foreign NGO workers in China, especially those who work on issues and with people considered sensitive by the Chinese government,” Patrick Poon, a researcher on China for Amnesty International in Hong Kong, said in an email. “The case exactly fits with what we were worried about the risk exposed to foreign NGOs when it was enacted.”
But Mr. Lee’s activities appeared to be the kind that would have drawn official suspicion in China even before the new law took force. Last year, China expelled Peter Dahlin, a Swedish human rights advocate living in Beijing, after detaining and interrogating him over his work helping rights lawyers and activists.
The detention probably also reflected a wider clampdown in China ahead of a Communist Party congress this year, said Shawn Shieh, an expert on Chinese civil society who lives in Hong Kong. That congress will endorse a new leadership lineup to serve under Xi Jinping in his second five-year term as party leader and state president.
“I think certainly Chinese police and security forces are in a hyper state of vigilance,” Mr. Shieh said by email. That intense vigilance would continue, in the months leading up to the party congress, which is likely to be in October or November, he said.
Tensions between China and Taiwan have risen since last year, when President Tsai Ing-wen, whose Democratic Progressive Party advocates reducing ties with China and asserting Taiwan’s separate status, took office.
Mr. Lee previously worked for the party, but he has not been a member for years, said Cheng Shiow-jiuan, the director of Taipei Wenshan Community College, where Mr. Lee is a manager. Other members of the party have traveled to China without threat.
At a news conference on Wednesday, Mr. Lee’s wife, Lee Ching-yu, and other supporters in Taipei asked China to give information about his location and release him immediately. Eeling Chiu, secretary of the Taiwan Association for Human Rights, said that Mr. Lee’s detention was “going to make even more Taiwanese view China’s human rights situation as extremely problematic.”
But Mr. Lee was going to China this time only to visit friends there and had no other agenda, his wife, Ms. Lee, said in an interview. She said officials from the island had told her that her husband was detained after crossing the border from Macau into China.
“I only hope that China handles this according to the standards of a civilized country,” she said.
Over the weekend, state security officers in southern China also prevented Feng Chongyi, a professor at the University of Technology Sydney, from taking flights back to Australia. Mr. Feng, a Chinese citizen with permanent residence in Australia, has supported liberal Chinese intellectuals critical of their government and has also been researching Chinese “rights defense” lawyers who challenge state power and abuses through litigation and public campaigns.
Mr. Feng has been staying at a hotel in Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong Province, while state security officers questioned him about his contacts and activities in China, as well as in Australia, his lawyer, Chen Jinxing, said by telephone on Wednesday. Mr. Feng has criticized Beijing’s efforts to influence ethnic Chinese people abroad and mobilize them to back it on territorial disputes and other controversies.
Under Mr. Xi, the government’s clampdown has not been confined to social organizations, said John Fitzgerald, a professor at Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne, Australia, who studies civil society in China.
“These restrictions appear to go well beyond civil society groups to professional lawyers, tertiary institutions, media, and so on,” he said. “Nothing is beyond tightening.”
