MELBOURNE, Australia — Barnaby Joyce, Australia’s deputy prime minister, said on Friday that he would resign his post after a series of damaging revelations, including an extramarital affair, led to weeks of searing headlines and a change in the rules for how politicians must conduct themselves.
“I’ve acknowledged that in many areas, I’m rough around the edges,” Mr. Joyce said at a news conference in the city of Armidale. “I never tried to be anything else.”
Mr. Joyce, a populist from rural Australia and a crucial member of Parliament’s governing coalition, had previously admitted to an affair with a former staff member, who is now pregnant. The Australian news media was reluctant to report on the relationship with the woman, Vikki Campion, until it was discovered that the couple were living rent-free in an apartment donated by a supporter.
Later, two women came forward to accuse Mr. Joyce of sexual harassment and misconduct.
Friday’s news conference came less than 24 hours after the second of those women came forward with allegations that Mr. Joyce had harassed her.
Mr. Joyce, through a spokesman, denied those allegations.
“This current cacophony of issues has to be put aside, and I think it’s my responsibility to do my bit to make sure that happens,” Mr. Joyce said at the news conference.
Mr. Joyce said that he would step down on Monday as leader of the National Party and deputy prime minister, but would continue to serve in Parliament as a member representing his New England constituency.
The scandal, nicknamed #Barnababy by the Australian news media, led Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull to introduce a new code of conduct barring ministers from having sexual relations with their subordinates.
Mr. Turnbull, who is currently on a trip to the United States to meet with President Trump, issued a statement thanking Mr. Joyce.
“I thank Barnaby for his service as deputy prime minister and in his various ministerial roles in which he has been a fierce advocate for rural and regional Australia,” Mr. Turnbull said.
Mr. Joyce, a social conservative who aggressively espoused what he called family values and fought against legalizing same-sex marriage, had been under pressure to resign for weeks. But it was only recently that members of his own party turned on him and called on him to step aside.
“Barnaby Joyce’s resignation shows us that no matter how much we might romanticize Australian politics — particularly rural politics — the numbers still matter at the end of the day,” said Jill Sheppard, a lecturer at Australian National University’s School of Politics and International Relations.
Mr. Joyce has weathered scandal in the past. Last year it was discovered that he held New Zealand citizenship, effectively making him ineligible to hold a seat in Parliament. Mr. Joyce renounced his citizenship, ran again in his district and won, eventually becoming deputy prime minister.
