   Kate Hudson is in Australia where she dropped a pretty penny to ride on a boat with a ridiculous name, chatted about feminism and doubled-down on the second amendment at a time when that's not very popular. 
   "Kate Hudson started laughing when she realized the name of the 46-foot yacht she had rented for the day in Australia was called 'Seduction,'" according to a witness Down Under. 
   We're told that the "Almost Famous" star spent $4,000 to take a small group on a boozy four-hour cruise through the Sydney Harbour and past the city's iconic opera house. 
   "While on the dock, Kate, who was wearing a sexy bathing suit and a sarong, chatted with a couple who said they were traveling on the Queen Mary 2 to New Zealand as part of the luxury ocean liner's three-month World Tour," according to our insider. 
   Hudson's trip wasn't just one big pleasure cruise. While speaking at a Business Chicks lunch on Friday, shortly before President Trump gave a speech in Maryland promoting gun ownership, Hudson supported firearms as well. 
   "I'm a great believer in upholding the constitution," she said, with the whole world buzzing over last week's 17-person massacre at a Lakeland, Florida high school. "I believe in upholding our second constitution amendment." 
   On Wednesday, at a Business Chicks luncheon attended by 1,700 people, our Aussie insider also heard Hudson talk about the Times Up Movement. The 38-year-old Golden Globe winner says that the cultural revolution now has women working together. 
   "Historically, women have been placed in the position where we have to compete with each other, and that's slowly starting to drift away, which is nice to see," she said. 
   The "Fools Gold" star was joined by her longtime boyfriend Danny Fujikawa on her Australian odyssey, which also included stops in Brisbane and Melbourne. She posted several photos of their meals on Instagram. But primarily, Hudson spent her time promoting the philanthropic Business Chicks organization, which in 2011, teamed up with The Hunger Project Australia to fight famine.   
