‘I Believe in Magic’
Australia Diary collects reader stories reflecting Australia’s unique character. We’d love to hear your story too. Email nytaustralia@nytimes.com and click here for more information.
I believe in magic. Not because I’ve seen it, but because I’ve felt it. 
Nestled in the rocks between many beaches on the East Coast of New South Wales lie mermaid pools, fairly narrow but deep rock pools on the ocean’s edge filled with seaweed and coral and fish. 
They’re not particularly unique features of an Australian beach, but these ones in particular are special. 
These ones are mine.
It was 9 a.m. and the rocks were already hot enough to send blistering pain through the soles of my feet as I ran across them around the headland. It was agony, but I was 13 and with a friend who seemed not bothered by it, so I kept it to myself. 
I stopped in a shallow puddle to relieve my feet but even that was near scalding. I watched in the distance as a wave collided with the rock face, resulting in a spectacular splash. 
After more tiptoed running, we finally reached our destination. Without a thought or hesitation, I jumped feet-first into the deep ocean pool, the coolness of the water soaking into my skin. 
I opened my eyes and the water was clear as crystal. It was like another world.
Forcing myself to stay under, I tried to take it all in. 
The seaweed, dancing slowly with the movement of the water, harbored small lemon-colored fish that swam away as my hand neared them. 
I touched my feet to the bottom but immediately pulled away as I felt the coral and shells graze them; they were beautiful but dangerously sharp. 
Tilting my head up, I watched the rays of sun drift lazily down through the glassy surface and let myself float back to the world above.
I emerged just as a wave hit the side of the rock, and I caught the spray of it. I breathed in the smell of the ocean and pulled myself up to sit on the edge of the pool. 
Staring back down into the hidden little world of magic, I saw an octopus curl a tentacle out from behind a pile of stones. I warily pulled my feet up a little before realizing it was brown, meaning it was harmless. 
I glanced up at my friend, grinning at me from the next pool over.
“I told you it was beautiful!” 
She didn’t seem to understand that we hadn’t found something just pretty; we’d found something truly magical.
