As the French Go to the Polls, Uncertainty Is the Only Sure Bet
PARIS — For at least the last three French elections, voters in the town of Louviers, about 60 miles northwest of Paris, have cast ballots for the candidate who ultimately won the presidency. So who are they voting for on Sunday, in the country’s closest race in memory?
“I haven’t decided. It’s gnawing at me,” said Charlène Hedoux, 30, a cleaning woman who was sitting at a bus stop this past week in central Louviers, which has a soaring Gothic church and bustling cafes. “I have children. I didn’t before. When one sees how these last few days have been going, it’s not very reassuring.”
And that was before the terrorist attack on Thursday that left a police officer dead in central Paris and added yet another combustible element to an already volatile race.
The election on Sunday is one of the most consequential in recent times — not just for France, but for Europe — and one of the most unpredictable.
Even at this late stage, a remarkable 28 percent or so of voters remained undecided. The four leading candidates span the extremes of the political spectrum and are locked in a virtual dead heat.
The potential outcomes are just as broad. Depending on who wins, France could seek to leave the European Union and recast security alliances with a tilt toward Russia. Some would have France take harsher stands on Muslims, immigration and domestic security.
Alternately, France may elect a president who wants to shrink the ranks of civil servants, eliminate some job protections and reduce France’s generous welfare state, making the country more competitive in the global economy but risking a popular backlash. Yet another possibility: a winner who aspires to sharply increase taxes on the rich and nationalize banks.
The two candidates who receive the most votes on Sunday will compete in a runoff on May 7.
“There’s never been a campaign where the uncertainty was so uncertain,” said Edouard Lecerf, global director for political and opinion research for Kantar Public, a public opinion research firm. “The mistrust of politicians is stronger than it has ever been.”
That mistrust appears to have caused many voters to veer away from traditional politicians in search of someone they feel is more principled, prompting even candidates who are insiders to claim they are “outsiders.”
A majority of French voters have historically supported parties with established ideologies, either mainstream left or right. But traditional left-right allegiances are breaking down all over in Europe — as they appear to have in the United States — as polarization grows.
Globalization is a new dividing line. Candidates on the extreme left and right crusaded against it, while the leading centrist candidate embraced it. That candidate, Emmanuel Macron, a former economy minister, formed a new party that combines pro-business, pro-European Union and pro-social welfare elements — a novelty in contemporary France.
With allegiances to existing parties diminishing, pollsters have found some voters torn between diametrically opposed candidates.
A good example was Pierre Haux, a teacher at a technical school, who attended a rally last week in Lille of the mainstream conservative candidate, François Fillon, who is under the cloud of a nepotism scandal that has led to claims of embezzlement.
Mr. Haux said he was also weighing voting for the far-left candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon, but worried that he was “a one-man show.”
The race’s fluidity has allowed each leading candidate to claim to be on the verge of victory. At least three have been in the lead at some point, making it almost impossible to identify the front-runner.
“I will be in the runoff,” Mr. Fillon told supporters on Thursday, though the current polls suggest that would be a reach.
Most striking is how voter concerns keep shifting, from day to day and even hour to hour, resembling the impatience of adolescents. That phenomenon is one of several that pollsters said had made the race so unpredictable.
In France, as elsewhere, the election may be decided in the provinces, in smaller and midsize towns and rural communities. Rural areas have proved especially unpredictable in recent votes, like Britain’s so-called Brexit vote to leave the European Union and President Trump’s election in the United States.
In addition, the trend lines — whether a candidate appeared to be steadily gaining votes, losing them or remaining flat — underscored the race’s volatility. Most recently they showed the third- and fourth-place candidates, Mr. Fillon and Mr. Mélenchon, gaining, with the two in the lead, Mr. Macron followed closely by the far-right Marine Le Pen, remaining flat or losing ground.
For French voters, who are facing 10 percent unemployment, with levels closer to 25 percent for young people, the most pressing issues are economic, but even those can lead in multiple directions.
Some voters attribute France’s economic ills to poor leadership, others to globalization and still others to an influx of immigrants.
Unlike in previous years, nothing in the current election has followed old patterns.
It is a cliché of French politics that voters follow their hearts in the first round, choosing the person they most want, but follow their heads in the runoff, choosing one less likely to do damage.
That equation may no longer apply. Because the race is so close, voters may try to choose strategically on Sunday and not risk an outcome in which two extremist candidates reach the final round.
On the other hand, if tradition holds and voters follow their hearts, it is not impossible to foresee a final round where voters must choose between extremes, Ms. Le Pen on the right and Mr. Mélenchon on the left.
Significant numbers of voters also appear likely to abstain or to cast a blank piece of paper to show their dissatisfaction. That, too, would seem to favor the nonestablishment candidates, whose supporters are more motivated to vote.
One such candidate is Ms. Le Pen, whose voters are passionately convinced she is the right choice.
“Let’s look after ourselves before we look after others,” said Catherine Rigaud, 56, who was waiting in line to enter the Zenith concert hall on the northeast edge of Paris where Ms. Le Pen was speaking in the campaign’s last week.
Ms. Rigaud used to vote for the mainstream right but said she would now vote for Ms. Le Pen. She is unemployed and partly disabled and said that her 600 euro (about $640) monthly government support check did not cover her rent.
Sebastien Orange, an art teacher who lives in Louviers, is fed up with politicians and will put a blank ballot in the voting box, he said as he watched ducks paddle in the placid Eure river that runs through town.
“Today, with social media, we know that more than ever they take us for idiots, with money to throw away,” Mr. Orange said, referring to politicians and, obliquely, to the embezzlement charges hanging over Mr. Fillon and to accusations of financial malfeasance against Ms. Le Pen.
“One forgets 1789 and why their heads were cut off,” he added of France’s former royalty, toppled and beheaded in the French Revolution.
“They stuffed themselves, they never declared their wealth and people say nothing to them. It’s just shameful,” he said.
More striking to pollsters is how changeable voters have been. The shooting of three police officers Thursday on the Champs-Élysées only increased the volatility. Some voters who had been leaning toward one camp said they were now likely to cast ballots for a different candidate, one they perceived as tougher on law-and-order issues.
“I used to hesitate between Macron and Fillon, but no longer,” said Roland Boulangé, 79, who was walking in his hometown, Rouen, a picturesque northern city, on Friday.
“I decided I’d vote for Fillon after the attack last night,” he said, choosing the more conservative of the two. “Macron is too young. We need someone experienced to fight against terrorism.”
Of 15 people interviewed on Friday in Rouen, less than a third said they would change their vote; all had been in the somewhat-but-not-entirely-undecided camp.
The major role played by social media in the campaign has added a new element to the mix even as it opened up new ways for polling companies to study voter thinking.
One company, Brandeye, which is based in South Africa and works for large financial institutions, as well as candidates around the world, studies social media conversations to tabulate positive and negative words about candidates, and how frequently candidates are mentioned.
The company’s assessments, a “net sentiment” for each candidate, differed markedly from those of traditional pollsters, but were similarly in flux. “The sentiment is very, very volatile,” Nic Ray, the chief marketing officer, said.
“But both Fillon and Mélenchon have more positive comments,” he added, suggesting that those two could well end up in the final round.
That matchup has not been discussed much, but with four leading candidates, at least six potential combinations of winners could emerge from the first round, all within the realm of possibility.
