Escort Who Claims to Have Russian Secrets Faces New Charges in Thailand
BANGKOK — A Belarusian escort jailed in Thailand who claims to have evidence of Russian meddling in United States elections faces new criminal charges of solicitation and conspiracy, the police said on Friday.
The escort, Anastasia Vashukevich, who says she had a brief affair with the powerful Russian aluminum tycoon Oleg V. Deripaska, was arrested in February with nine others at a sex training seminar in Pattaya, south of Bangkok. Most had been charged with working without a permit and were awaiting deportation.
The Pattaya police chief, Col. Apichai Krobpetch, said Friday that all 10 have now been charged with soliciting prostitution and conspiracy. He declined to provide details about the charges or to say who brought the case to the police.
Ms. Vashukevich, 27, who also goes by the name Nastya Rybka, gained notoriety in Russia after she joined a yacht trip with Mr. Deripaska in August 2016 as an escort and posted photos of the two of them together.
She also posted an audio recording of Mr. Deripaska discussing Russian-American relations with a deputy prime minister, Sergei E. Prikhodko. Both men are close to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
Mr. Deripaska also had close ties with Paul Manafort, who managed Donald Trump’s presidential campaign for five months. Mr. Manafort, who has been indicted on money laundering charges by the special counsel Robert S. Mueller III, owed millions of dollars to Mr. Deripaska and offered to give him private briefings on the presidential campaign.
Ms. Vashukevich said after her arrest that she had additional audio recordings of visitors to the yacht, including some who spoke English and talked about the United States elections. She called herself the “missing link” in the Russia investigation. The group has asked for asylum in exchange for the recordings.
Alexander Kirillov, 38, whom Ms. Vashukevich describes as her seduction coach and who also was arrested at the seminar, has accused the Russian government of staging a covert operation in Thailand in an attempt to silence them.
The two are being held largely incommunicado at a Bangkok detention center.
Arrest reports and police cellphone messages show that the police were working with a “foreign spy” who went to the one-week seminar and told the police when the time was right to raid the meeting.
It was unclear whether the solicitation charge was connected to the seminar or to an incident that occurred outside the sessions. Several people who attended the workshop described it as relatively tame, with lectures on the art of seduction aimed at male Russian tourists.
Friends of the 10 accused say that two of them were deported to Russia before the new charges were filed. Colonel Apichai declined to say whether that was the case.
