Meet the 7 Russian Oligarchs Hit by the New U.S. Sanctions
MOSCOW — The Trump administration on Friday announced new sanctions against a list of Russian business tycoons, government officials and corporations, part of the continuing political and economic fallout from the nerve agent attack on a former Russian spy and his daughter in England last month.
The roster includes some of the most powerful people and entities in Russia, with ties to President Vladimir V. Putin and his government. Many of them are suspected of corruption sanctioned by the Kremlin.
Britain has said that Moscow was likely behind the poisoning of Sergei V. Skripal and Yulia Skripal, and has persuaded its allies on both sides of the Atlantic. Russia denies any connection to the attack.
Here are some of the biggest names on the new sanctions list, and where their money came from.
Mr. Bogdanov, 66, is the director general and co-owner of Surgutneftegas, the fourth-biggest oil producer in Russia, which has an unusually opaque ownership structure, even by Russian standards. On paper, Mr. Bogdanov, an associate of Mr. Putin’s since the days when the president was a local official in St. Petersburg, owns just 0.37 percent of the company, with a majority of its shares controlled by a web of “noncommercial partnerships.”
Surgutneftegas keeps cash reserves of about $38.5 billion, more than any other Russian company. Why it would stockpile so much money is a mystery that has fueled speculation that Mr. Bogdanov has helped hide money for Mr. Putin.
Those rumors have never been substantiated, but efforts to probe the company’s ownership and finances have sometimes proved perilous. Bill Browder, an American-born London-based financier who used to work in Moscow but now faces arrest if he returns, first came under attack from the Russian authorities for tax fraud and other alleged crimes after he started digging into the oil company’s affairs in the early 2000s.
One of the most secretive Russian tycoons, Mr. Bogdanov avoids flaunting his wealth. He is known as the “hermit of Siberia” because, unlike many Russian billionaires, he does not live in Moscow, but has stayed close to his Siberian oil fields.
Mr. Deripaska controls Basic Element, which in turn owns more than 100 Russian and international companies. He laid the foundation of his empire in the “aluminum wars” of the 1990s, a vicious struggle for control of natural resources in which he emerged triumphant, becoming the undisputed king of aluminum production in Russia.
Mr. Deripaska, 50, married Polina Yumasheva, whose father, Valentin Yumashev, worked for former President Boris N. Yeltsin and married Mr. Yeltsin’s daughter, Tatyana Dyachenko. Mr. Yumashev and Mr. Putin were both top aides to Mr. Yeltsin in the late 1990s.
Later, Mr. Deripaska employed Paul Manafort, the political consultant who later became director of President Trump’s 2016 campaign. Mr. Manafort has since offered to testify in an investigation into Russia’s role in the election. Mr. Deripaska and Mr. Manafort have since feuded, tangling over money that each accuses the other of owing.
Mr. Deripaska was at the center of a recent video investigation, put together by Aleksei A. Navalny, an anti-corruption campaigner and a vociferous opponent of President Putin. The investigation found that Mr. Deripaska organized an outing on his luxury yacht, attended by Sergei Prikhodko, deputy prime minister of Russia and a Kremlin foreign policy adviser, and female escorts.
Mr. Kerimov, 52, is both the owner of Polyus, Russia’s biggest gold mining company, and a member of the Federation Council, the upper chamber of Russian parliament. He has 
