Ex-General Says U.A.E. Blocks His Return to Egypt to Run for President
CAIRO — The former Air Force general who narrowly lost Egypt’s only free presidential election said Wednesday that the leaders of the United Arab Emirates were preventing him from leaving their country, seeking to block him from running again against President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
“I was surprised to find myself prevented from leaving our sister country,” the former general, Ahmed Shafik, said in a videotaped statement from Dubai, where he has lived in exile with the support of the Emiratis since he lost the 2012 Egyptian presidential election. “I reject interventions into the affairs of my country by preventing me from participating in a constitutional process and a sacred national mission.”
Such restrictions on Mr. Shafik’s travel would underscore the determination of the Emiratis to forestall any possible challenge to Mr. Sisi, another former general whose military takeover in 2013 the Emiratis strongly supported.
It also appears to be the second time in less than a month that a Persian Gulf monarchy has attempted to influence the affairs of a neighbor through a politician abroad, following the resignation issued by the Lebanese prime minister, Saad Hariri, during a short and possible forced stay in Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Shafik could not be reached for comment on Wednesday night, and the limitations on his travel could not be confirmed. Dina Adly, a lawyer for Mr. Shafik, said that intermediaries for the Emirati authorities had told him to cancel a trip abroad because “running for president was a bad idea.”
Ms. Adly said Mr. Shafik had been detained under house arrest since 3 a.m. on Friday. “Now they will have to let him go,” Ms. Adly said, as a result of the publicity generated by his video. “So this is good.”
Anwar Gargash, the United Arab Emirates’ minister of state for foreign affairs, posted in a message on Twitter that there was “no obstacle” stopping Mr. Shafik from leaving and that the Emirates were “sad” to learn that Mr. Shafik was ungrateful. “We facilitated matters for him and we have generously welcomed him, despite our strong reservations about some of his stances,” Mr. Gargash wrote.
Mr. Shafik, 76, had released an earlier video statement on Wednesday declaring his intention to enter the Egyptian presidential election expected next spring. That announcement introduced the first element of suspense into what had appeared would be an easy election victory for Mr. Sisi. The prospect of a contest between two military men would be the first public indication since Mr. Sisi took power of internal divisions within the ruling elite of officers, businessmen and security chiefs.
Egyptian critics argued Wednesday that the Emiratis must have feared that such a contest might have posed difficulties for Mr. Sisi at a time when Egypt’s economy is suffering badly and the government is struggling to maintain public security.
An assault in a town in the North Sinai last week killed more than 300 worshipers at a mosque, in the latest indication that the four-year-old militant insurgency centered there threatens Egyptian civilians as well as security forces.
“A change of blood might be what is called for,” Mr. Shafik said in the first video statement, citing the deep downturn in the Egyptian economy, the deterioration of public services and the accumulation of public debt.
The Egyptian government might find other ways to thwart a Shafik candidacy. When he left Egypt after losing the 2012 presidential race, prosecutors were investigating corruption charges against him related to his tenure as the minister of civil aviation, a post he held for a decade beginning in 2001. Those charges might be revived to deter him from returning to Egypt or competing in the race.
If he is able to return and run, Mr. Shafik’s military record and well-known name may make him a strong candidate. He fought in Egypt’s two wars with Israel, in 1967 and 1973, and rose to command the Air Force. As minister of civil aviation, he oversaw the successful modernization and development of both the national airline and the Cairo airport.
He developed strong connections among the business elite, and he was widely discussed as a possible successor to former President Hosni Mubarak. In a bid to bolster his support during his last days in power in 2011, Mr. Mubarak had promoted Mr. Shafik to prime minister in the hope that he could resolve the crisis brought about by a popular uprising.
Mr. Shafik lost the presidential election the next year by only about 2 percent of the vote. The winner was Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, whom Mr. Sisi removed from office in 2013.
Although Mr. Shafik campaigned against Mr. Morsi in 2012 as a defender of law-and-order and an admirer of Mr. Mubarak, his video on Wednesday suggested that this time he intended to run as a champion of democracy against Mr. Sisi.
“A true democracy and basic human rights are not grants from anyone,” Mr. Shafik said in his video. “It is also not something that is granted or given gradually at all. You either have a democracy or you have no democracy.”
Mr. Shafik declined to challenge Mr. Sisi in his election as president in 2014. Observers reported that the election fell short of international standards, and a leaked audio recording captured Mr. Shafik predicting that the race would be “a farce.”
“I know very well they will fix all the ballot boxes,” he said, adding, “This is going to be a comedy show.”
He confirmed the authenticity of the recording but said he had meant only to criticize the military’s open endorsement of Mr. Sisi, then the defense minister. Election officials said Mr. Sisi received more than 97 percent of the votes.
There have already been signs that the Egyptian security services may seek to handicap challengers to Mr. Sisi. Only one other possible candidate has entered the race, Khaled Ali, a human rights lawyer leading a protest campaign with little chance of success.
Mr. Shafik stuttered or faltered at times during his video statement on Wednesday, which may remind Egyptians that he has had a reputation for absent-mindedness. His tenure as prime minister ended after just a few months in 2011 when he was forced to resign after losing his temper on a television talk show in a debate with a novelist, Alaa Al Aswany.
“I fought in the war!” Mr. Shafik blustered. “I killed and was killed!”
