North Korea Launches Two Short-Range Missiles, South Korea Says
SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea fired two short-range missiles off its east coast on Thursday amid stalled efforts to resume talks on ending the country’s nuclear weapons program, the South Korean military said.
The first short-range missile, launched from near Wonsan, a coastal town east of the capital, Pyongyang, flew 430 kilometers (267 miles), reaching a height of 50 kilometers (31 miles) before landing in waters between North Korea and Japan, South Korean defense officials said. The second missile flew 690 kilometers (430 miles) further, the officials said, citing analytical data from United States officials.
The officials said both missiles were fired from mobile launch vehicles, but more analysis was needed to determine whether the missiles were based on ballistic technology. A United Nations resolution bans North Korea from building or testing ballistic missiles.
The launchings were the first such test since President Trump and the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, met on June 30 in South Korea in the Demilitarized Zone.
The previous tests were fired on May 9, when North Korea launched what military experts called short-range ballistic missiles.
North Korea has recently been expressing frustration with Washington and Seoul. It warned on July 16 that if the United States did not cancel a joint military drill with South Korea scheduled for next month, it might scuttle efforts to resume negotiations with Washington and even resume nuclear and long-range missile tests.
When Mr. Kim met with President Trump at Panmunjom in late June, they agreed to restart staff-level talks on the terms for denuclearizing North Korea. Mr. Trump said then that negotiations could resume within two or three weeks.
But North Korea appeared to link the resumption of talks to the cancellation of the military drill, code-named 19-2 Dong Maeng, saying that it undermined a mood for dialogue created when Mr. Kim and Mr. Trump met.
Mr. Kim had announced a halt to his country’s nuclear and intercontinental ballistic missile tests in April 2018, paving the way for his first meeting with Mr. Trump, held in Singapore in June 2018.
North Korea conducted its last major weapons test in November 2017, when it launched a missile believed powerful enough to reach the continental United States.
After the Singapore meeting, Mr. Trump vowed to halt major joint military drills with South Korea. But the South Korean and American militaries have agreed to hold smaller and reconfigured joint drills, and 19-2 Dong Maeng is one of them.
The Singapore meeting ended with a vague agreement in which Mr. Trump committed to building new relations and providing security guarantees for North Korea in return for Mr. Kim’s agreement to “work toward complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”
But when the leaders met again in Hanoi, Vietnam, in February, they failed to agree on how to implement their earlier deal.
The Hanoi talks collapsed when Mr. Kim demanded that Washington lift all major sanctions against his country in return for the dismantling of its nuclear complex in Yongbyon, north of Pyongyang. Mr. Trump insisted on a more comprehensive breaking up of the North’s nuclear programs, including its nuclear weapons and missiles.
“North Korea is clearly upset that the U.S. and South Korea are conducting joint military exercises,” said Harry J. Kazianis, senior director of Korean studies at the Washington-based Center for the National Interest.
“Because of this, Pyongyang has refused to set a date for working-level talks with Washington, won’t accept food aid from Seoul and is now once again testing weapons systems that will surely increase tensions. We should not be shocked by this move and, in fact, we should have seen it coming.”
North Korean officials have recently expressed their anger at the planned joint military drill and indicated that they might not accept 50,000 tons of rice that the South has offered as humanitarian aid, South Korean officials said on Wednesday.
South Korea offered the aid through the United Nations World Food Program last month in the hope that such a gesture would help the North return to talks on improving inter-Korean ties and ending its nuclear weapons program.
Japan confirmed on Thursday that North Korea had launched projectiles.
North Korea’s recent resumption of short-range missile tests is widely seen as a warning that it may launch longer-range missiles if Washington does not ease sanctions. Mr. Kim has indicated that he will give the United States until the end of the year to show more flexibility, or his country will seek an alternative to diplomatic negotiations.
With no sign of international sanctions lifting any time soon, North Korea has been exhorting its citizens to brace for a prolonged standoff with the United States. Humanitarian aid workers and defectors from the North have reported in recent months that the North has cut down on food rations.
”These tests risk becoming routine, even as the talks nominally continue,” said Adam Mount, a North Korea expert at the Federation of American Scientists.
“North Korea has several newer systems that it would like to test further, to refine their designs and increase confidence that they would work as intended,” he said. “Without an agreement to restrict missile tests, it is likely they will continue and perhaps expand to longer-range systems.”
