U.N. General Assembly Updates  Trump Speaks Out on Globalization
President Trump, whose apocalyptic speech in his United Nations debut last year riveted much of the world’s attention, spoke again on the world’s most important diplomatic stage on Tuesday, at the organization’s New York headquarters. 
Mr. Trump has alienated allies and sidled up to adversaries, all while he pursues an America First agenda. Unlike in 2017, however, when Mr. Trump threatened to annihilate North Korea and its leader, Kim Jong-un, he touted his budding friendship with Mr. Kim — even though there has been little progress in their underlying dispute over North Korea’s nuclear weapons and missiles. 
[Read our article on why Mr. Trump’s aides feared he might be too nice at this year’s General Assembly.]
Mr. Trump boasted of what he called impressive accomplishments in the United States and around the world.
“In less than two years, my administration has accomplished more than almost any administration in the history of our country,” he said, setting off murmurs of laughter by world leaders in the cavernous hall. 
“I did not expect that reaction,” he said.
“The United States is stronger, safer and a richer country than it was when I assumed office less than two years ago,” Mr. Trump told the General Assembly, in his second address as president. “We are standing up for America and the American people. We are also standing up for the world.”
He said that under his administration the United States had started building a wall along the border with Mexico, defeated the Islamic State and eased the crisis with North Korea through dialogue with the leader of the nuclear-armed state.
“We have engaged with North Korea to replace the specter of conflict with a bold and new push for peace,” Mr. Trump said, speaking about his Singapore summit meeting with Mr. Kim.
“The missiles and rockets are no longer flying in every direction, nuclear testing has stopped,” the president said. “I would like to thank Chairman Kim for his courage and for the steps he has taken though much work remains to be done.”
Mr. Trump said that sanctions against North Korea would stay in place until denuclearization occurs, but called the moment “far greater” than people would understand.
Mr. Trump denounced Iran’s leaders, calling them a “corrupt dictatorship” responsible for “death and destruction” and said his reimposition of nuclear sanctions had severely weakened the Iranian government.
 “They do not respect their neighbors or borders or the sovereign rights of nations,” he said.
He also called for the “restoration of democracy in Venezuela,” and that he was adding economic sanctions on President Nicolás Maduro’s “inner circle” and close advisers.
In a list of complaints about globalism, which he portrayed as a threat to American sovereignty, Mr. Trump rejected the legitimacy of the International Criminal Court, echoing recent statements by top aides like John R. Bolton, his national security adviser. 
“As far as America is concerned,” Mr. Trump said, the court — which prosecutes war crimes and crimes against humanity — has “no legitimacy and no authority.”
We “reject the ideology of globalism,” he said.
He also spoke of renegotiating “bad and broken trade deals,” and said that “many nations agree that the trade system is in dire need” of change. He said the United States had “racked up $13 billion in trade deficits” in the last two decades. 
“But those days are over,” he said. “We will no longer tolerate such abuse.”
While Mr. Trump touted America’s energy independence, he assailed the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries — which includes Saudi Arabia, a strong United States ally — for rising oil prices.
OPEC nations are “ripping off the rest of the world,” he said. “I don’t like it. Nobody should like it.” 
“We want them to stop raising prices, we want them to start lowering prices,” he said in reference to the OPEC cartel. “We are not going to put up with it, these horrible prices, much longer.”
Warning against international reliance on a single supplier of energy, Mr. Trump applauded some European nations, singling out Poland, for moving to establish pipelines with the Baltics to break a dependence on Russian oil — in one of his few mentions of Russia. 
But as he has done before, he attacked Germany for what he called its energy dependence.
“Germany will become totally dependent on Russian energy if it does not immediately change course,” Mr. Trump said.
Mr. Rouhani, who has all but ruled out a meeting with Mr. Trump, offered a portrait of his country that is law-abiding, respectful and first in the fight against terrorism — diametrically opposite the description presented a few hours earlier by the American president.
Mr. Rouhani denounced the Trump administration not only for repudiating the nuclear agreement, but also for threatening through the use of sanctions to punish any country that seeks to do business with Iran.
“The economic war that the United States has initiated under the rubric of new sanctions not only targets the Iranian people, but entails harmful repercussions for people of other countries,” Mr. Rouhani said. He also made clear that he thought Mr. Trump’s offer to talk with Iran’s leaders was disingenuous at best.
“It is ironic that the United States government does not even conceal its plan for overthrowing the same government it invites to talks,” Mr. Rouhani said.
In a clear sign of irritation, the Trump administration warned the United States’ chief European partners on Tuesday of unhappiness over their move to bypass its reimposed sanctions on Iran. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and the national security adviser, John R. Bolton, told a conference in New York that the European plan to create a way for Iran to conduct international financial transactions was a big mistake. 
 “We do not intend to allow our sanctions to be evaded by Europe or anybody else,” Mr. Bolton said at the conference, which was organized by United Against Nuclear Iran, a group that has criticized the 2015 nuclear deal reached under the Obama administration. 
Mr. Pompeo said on his Twitter account that the United States, which withdrew from the agreement in May, was “disturbed & deeply disappointed to hear the remaining parties in the deal announce they are setting up a special payment system to bypass U.S. sanctions. This is one of most counterproductive measures imaginable for regional & global peace & security. “
Mr. Bolton, who has made no secret of his antipathy for Iran’s leaders, also directed some of his strongest ire at them. "If you cross us or our allies or our partners, you harm our citizens,” he said. “If you continue to lie and cheat, yes there will indeed be hell to pay." 
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, who spoke directly after President Trump addressed the assembly, took aim at some United States policies, without specifically mentioning the Trump administration.
Mr. Erdogan assailed Mr. Trump’s Iran sanctions, support for a Kurdish-led coalition fighting the Islamic State in Syria and the legal protections afforded to Fethullah Gulen, the Turkish cleric-in-exile in Pennsylvania. Mr. Erdogan has described Mr. Gulen and his organization as the instigator of the failed 2016 coup in Turkey. 
“Where does the head, the mastermind of that terrorist organization reside?” Mr. Erdogan said. “In the United States of America. And from there they export terror.”
Despite Mr. Erdogan’s criticism of the United States, he and Mr. Trump seemed to be friendly when they met on the sidelines of the assembly. It was the first time the two had met in person since Mr. Trump announced sanctions against Turkey this summer, raising tensions between the two nations. 
The sanctions, which have contributed to a sharp downturn in Turkey’s once-mighty economy, came after Turkey refused to release an American pastor, Andrew Brunson, who was arrested in a widespread crackdown after the failed coup.
Mr. Erdogan’s communications director shared photos on Twitter of the Turkish leader shaking hands with Mr. Trump. 
President Emmanuel Macron of France, during his time at the podium, defended multilateralism, a policy that Mr. Trump rejected. Without multilateralism, Mr. Macron warned, global wars would return. He cautioned that “nationalism always leads to defeat.”
“I do not accept the erosion of multilateralism and don’t accept our history unraveling,” Mr. Macron said. “Our children are watching.”
He also took aim at Mr. Trump’s decision to quit the Paris climate agreement — an ambitious effort to halt climate change. 
“The Paris agreement has stayed intact, and that is because we have decided to stay unified in spite of the United States’ decision to withdraw,” Mr. Macron said. “This is power, and this is the way that we overcome the challenges.”
Urging radical action to ensure that the goals of the agreement are met, Mr. Macron told fellow signers to consider action against the countries that rejected it.
“Let’s, for example, stop signing trade agreements with those who don’t comply with the Paris agreement,” he said. “Let’s have our trade agreements take on board our environmental obligations.” 
The United States and Syria are the only nations that are not part of the agreement
President Trump had a chilly greeting for his Canadian counterpart, Justin Trudeau, during a lunch hosted by the United Nations secretary general on Tuesday afternoon, remaining firmly in his seat when the prime minister approached. 
Just before the lunch started, Prime Minister Trudeau briefly approached Mr. Trump and shook his hand as the American president sat at the head table, according to a White House pool report.
A video of the incident shows Mr. Trump looking intently downward as the man seated next to him rises to shake hands with Mr. Trudeau, appearing to give the Canadian leader the cold shoulder. When Mr. Trudeau extends his hand, the president looks over briefly, quickly shakes it and then turns back to the table. 
The exchange could be a sign of still-chilly relations between the allies, which had a war of words after the Group of 7 summit meeting in Quebec in June and subsequent disagreements on a stalled Nafta trade deal. 
António Guterres, the United Nations secretary general, who was first to address the General Assembly on Tuesday, called for solidarity among member nations and urged world leaders to help revitalize the global body at a time when multilateralism is “under fire.”
He focused his speech on a “trust deficit disorder” playing out around the world that has affected the United Nations’ ability to function. He also cited divisions in the Security Council — the United Nations body primarily responsible for maintaining international peace and security — that have left the council unable to make decisions. 
“We must repair broken trust,” Mr. Guterres said. “We must invigorate our multilateral project, and we must uphold dignity once and for all.”
“Despite the chaos and confusion of our world, I see winds of hope blowing around the globe,” Mr. Guterres said, pointing to recent peace agreements between Ethiopia and Eritrea, and between warring parties in South Sudan. 
New York went into gridlock mode as the F.B.I., Secret Service and New York Police Department safeguarded visiting dignitaries to attend the General Assembly. Mr. Trump’s decision to stay at his Manhattan penthouse atop Trump Tower throughout added to the already chaotic midtown traffic. 
The General Assembly typically creates traffic jams. At one point during the two-week session, the police said, 189 motorcades are expected to cross Manhattan in a single day.
Mr. Trump’s choice to stay at Trump Tower has not helped. This year, 55th Street from Sixth to Madison Avenues, and 56th Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues, are among the streets closed to vehicular traffic. Whenever Mr. Trump has exited and entered Trump Tower this week, Fifth Avenue was closed to vehicles from 58th Street to at least 56th Street.
Nearly 50 dump trucks filled with sand serve as street barricades, according to officials. Earlier this week, at least 17 of them had lined Fifth Avenue between 55th and 57th Streets.
The vehicles — garbage trucks and salt spreaders that weigh 16 tons and can carry the same weight in sand — have previously appeared at mass gatherings including the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade and New Year’s Eve celebrations in Times Square.
“They are a 32-ton obstacle should someone try and penetrate that area,” said Vito A. Turso, a spokesman for the Department of Sanitation, which supplies the vehicles.
Read more here on how New York prepares for the world leaders that attend the General Assembly.
“Wanted for mass murder,” say the posters, pasted on street corners and illuminated on the sides of special trucks circulating in near United Nations headquarters in New York.
They feature the photo of a bespectacled man named Min Aung Hlaing, the commander in chief of Myanmar’s military, who a United Nations fact finding mission has said should face genocide charges over the slaughter of thousands of Rohingya Muslims — a stateless ethnic group — in the country last year.
The plight of the Rohingya is not high on the list of priorities at this year’s United Nations General Assembly gathering. But the posters, part of a campaign by Amnesty International, serve as blunt reminders to heads of state, visiting dignitaries and regular New Yorkers of the atrocities carried by the Myanmar military against the minority group. Thousands were killed and more than 700,000 forced to flee their homes when soldiers launched coordinated attacks on Rohingya villages in Myanmar’s Rakhine State over several weeks in August and September last year.
So far, accountability has been elusive. China, a Security Council member and an ally of Myanmar’s government, stands in the way of serious United Nations action, such as imposing sanctions. The International Criminal Court has said it has jurisdiction to evaluate whether criminal charges could be filed, though in this case it is the Trump administration — which has expressed disdain for the court — that could prove an obstacle.
There Rohingya are not represented at high level meetings at the United Nation’s this week, and Myanmar’s leaders, who have denied responsibility for the mass killings, have shunned the event.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel laureate and Myanmar’s civilian leader, has skipped the General Assembly gathering for the second year in a row. Once embraced internationally as a humanitarian hero, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi is now something of a pariah, accused of failing to raise her voice in opposition to the killing.
Reporting was contributed by Rick Gladstone, Megan Specia, Michael Schwirtz, Sarah Maslin Nir, Mark Landler, Gardiner Harris and Tess Felder.
