U.S.-Backed Forces Begin Assault on Raqqa, ISIS Stronghold in Syria
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Forces backed by the United States said on Tuesday that they had begun a long-anticipated offensive against Islamic State militants in the northern Syrian city of Raqqa, the group’s self-proclaimed capital.
The forces, collectively called the Syrian Democratic Forces and made up of Syrian Kurdish fighters and Arab militias, have over the past month surrounded Raqqa from the east, north and west. On Tuesday, they began an assault on the city limits, aided by airstrikes from the United States-led coalition and by artillery.
The battle opened in the middle of a new outbreak of diplomatic turmoil between allies in the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.
Even as the initial barrage was beginning, President Trump published Twitter posts excoriating Qatar, the host of the American air base at the heart of the effort. And he declared his support for Saudi Arabia and other Arab neighbors as they moved to isolate Qatar and single it out for blame for terrorism and regional intrigue.
Pentagon officials insisted that the surge in tensions between the Saudi and Qatari camps — both members of the anti-Islamic State coalition — would not affect operations against the militant group in Raqqa and Mosul, Iraq.
In Raqqa on Tuesday, shops were closed and people were staying inside, residents said. Electricity and water were out. Bakeries were still working but were expected to shut down soon for lack of flour.
One resident said coalition warplanes and drones had attacked ferries transporting vegetables across the Euphrates River into Raqqa, causing the deliveries to halt.
Residents of Raqqa say that in recent weeks numerous Islamic State fighters and their families have left the city, heading southeast along the Euphrates to the city of Mayadeen, in Deir al-Zour Province. Civilian casualties and damage to infrastructure from airstrikes by the United States-led coalition sharply increased as the fighting approached, according to residents.
In Syria, the Islamic State is expected to make a final stand in the province of Deir al-Zour. Its forces have for some time surrounded 200,000 people in a section of the provincial capital, also called Deir al-Zour, that is controlled by the Syrian government.
That has set off a race to Deir al-Zour among an array of rival forces aiming to take control of the nearby border with Iraq.
Moving east from central Syria and the desert city of Palmyra are forces fighting for the government of President Bashar al-Assad, including Syrian Army troops and Iran-backed militias like Hezbollah. Moving north from rebel-held southern Syria are American-backed insurgent groups. The Syrian Democratic Forces attacking Raqqa also aim to continue southeast to the same area.
On Tuesday, the United States-led coalition also launched airstrikes directly against Syrian government forces for the second time in less than a month. The United States Central Command said that Syrian forces — more than 60 soldiers, with some armored vehicles and heavy weaponry — had breached the security zone around the base at Tanf in southeastern Syria near the Jordanian and Iraqi borders. American and British forces there are training Syrian opposition fighters to battle the Islamic State, and airstrikes were carried out under similar circumstances on May 18, officials said.
There were unconfirmed reports of new forces joining the fray in Raqqa Province too, with pro-government forces moving into the province from the east.
For now, though, the Raqqa offensive could take a long time, with a very high toll, judging from the protracted offensive in Iraq against the Islamic State’s other major urban stronghold, in Mosul.
Even with a victory, the aftermath of the Raqqa fight could be difficult, as well, with many residents fearful of the Kurdish militias involved in the attack. The Syrian Democratic Forces say they will hand power to a local council made up of Arab and Kurdish civilians, but in other places where they have done that, like the city of Manbij, many residents say the councils are a thin facade for the militias’ control.
The American military said in a statement that the fight for Raqqa would be “long and difficult” but that along with the Mosul battle, it would “deliver a decisive blow to the idea of ISIS as a physical caliphate.”
Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, the commander of the coalition, said in the statement that it would be hard for the Islamic State to convince new recruits “that ISIS is a winning cause when they just lost their twin ‘capitals’ in both Iraq and Syria.”
He added: “We all saw the heinous attack in Manchester, England. ISIS threatens all of our nations, not just Iraq and Syria, but in our own homelands as well. This cannot stand.”
Airwars, an organization based in London that tracks civilian casualties from international airstrikes, called on all forces to take all precautions to avoid harm to civilians.
For weeks, Islamic State fighters have been carting away weapons, supplies and even large generators and telecommunications equipment to their fallback positions in Mayadeen, residents said.
On Tuesday, the Islamic State ordered internet cafes to close by Wednesday, residents said, in order to further limit information reaching the wider world.
