Indonesia’s Pluralists Made Her a Hero, but Spotlight Brings Suspicion
JAKARTA, Indonesia — Just a few weeks ago she was a shy, bookish high school student from a small town in the Indonesian province of East Java who liked to raid her local library and pull books randomly from the shelves.
But last week the head-scarf-wearing student, Asa Firda Inayah, 18, was standing on the stage of “Rosi,” a prominent national talk show, reciting one of her many famous Facebook posts on the importance of pluralism, as inspirational violin music played in the background.
“By chance I was born in Indonesia to a Muslim family,” Ms. Asa read in a squeaky voice. “If I had been born in Sweden or Israel, to a Christian or Jewish family, is there any guarantee that I would embrace Islam? There isn’t.”
That essay, “Heritage,” and dozens of other writings she has posted to Facebook have made her an instant celebrity in Muslim-majority Indonesia, which is still torn over the blasphemy conviction of Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, the Christian governor of Jakarta, the capital, who was removed from his post and put in jail last month.
Ms. Asa’s sudden fame led to a meeting last week with President Joko Widodo and a speaking engagement at a prestigious university. She also appeared on numerous news and talk show programs to explain the importance of religious tolerance.
But there was a flip side to the fame: Islamic hard-liners reportedly began calling her home in the middle of the night, threatening to kill her. She is now being protected by a local moderate Muslim militia.
The local news media has even compared her to Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani teenager and advocate of women’s education who was shot in the head by the Taliban.
“Thank God there is still a young generation like Afi,” Joko Anwar, a prominent film director, said in a Twitter post, referring to Ms. Asa by her nickname.
But even before her meeting with the president was scheduled, reports had begun to emerge that the feel-good story of Ms. Asa was not what it appeared, and that she had plagiarized popular posts from other social media users’ accounts.
When questioned by reporters, Ms. Asa at first brushed off the allegations, calling them a “private matter” and saying she had little recollection of the Facebook account from which she had apparently lifted one of her most famous posts to the social network. Two days later she acknowledged in a Facebook post that she had plagiarized, writing, “We all have. Who hasn’t done that?”
Hard-line Islamist websites seized on the news. The Islamic Defender’s Front, a hard-line organization that campaigned to have Mr. Basuki, the former governor, arrested on blasphemy charges, said in a Facebook post that Ms. Asa and the governor shared similar faults.
“It’s exactly like Ahok who won’t ever admit he’s wrong,” the post said, referring to Mr. Basuki by his nickname.
A Facebook account bearing the name Mita Handayani, which Ms. Asa had been accused of plagiarizing from, said on social media that she had no problem with Ms. Asa’s using her writing. Ms. Mita added that she thought Ms. Asa was merely being targeted for her religious tolerance.
The lightning rise and potential fall of the East Javanese teenager has led Indonesians to reflect on why they had elevated a small-town high school student to the status of national hero so quickly. And it ignited an online debate in Indonesia about how serious the offense of plagiarism was, and whether it should be forgiven.
Pradewi Tri Chatami, 30, a recent college graduate, posted on Facebook that the recent triumph of hard-line Islamic groups in Jakarta meant that progressive Indonesians were looking for anyone willing to stand up for pluralism.
“It’s a scramble to find an icon,” Ms. Pradewi said in a telephone interview. “I liked her because she was a sophisticated young woman who was brave enough to share her thoughts. But to idolize someone is ultimately to sacrifice them.”
Social media is extremely popular among middle-class Indonesians, drawing an estimated 80 million users to sites like Facebook and Twitter in this country of about 250 million.
Ross Tapsell, a researcher on the Indonesian media at Australian National University, said middle-class Indonesians regularly made folk heroes out of less-advantaged Indonesians they discovered on social media, only to be disappointed later.
He cited the example of an older satay seller who was hailed as a stoic hero by social media users for continuing to sell grilled beef after terrorists launched a grenade attack near his stand in Jakarta in last year.
But when journalists eventually interviewed the newly legendary satay seller, he said the reason he kept selling his beef after the attack was that if he abandoned his stand it might have been stolen.
“His reaction actually told us about poverty,” Mr. Tapsell said.
Similarly, he said, many Indonesians put Ms. Asa “on a pedestal” and were disappointed when she turned out to be less perfect than they had imagined.
“The middle class has only themselves to blame for making out this 18-year-old from Banyuwangi something she wasn’t,” he said, referring to Ms. Asa’s hometown.
Ms. Asa did not respond to calls or Facebook messages seeking comment.
Savic Ali, a progressive Muslim activist who runs websites for Nahdlatul Ulama, the nation’s largest Muslim organization, said that when he met Ms. Asa in Banyuwangi, she had struck him as a fairly typical teenager, one who preferred listening to her headphones over conversation.
He said he was impressed that Ms. Asa had the bravery to post the things she did, even if not all the words were necessarily hers originally.
“The majority of people aren’t brave enough to raise their voices even though they actually disagree with the views of hard-liners,” he said. “Meanwhile here’s this teenager who feels no such burden.”
