In Geneva Speeches, Nikki Haley Casts U.S. as Rights Champion
GENEVA — The American ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki R. Haley, took a swipe on Tuesday at Saudi Arabia’s human rights record, criticized the United Nations for what she called its anti-Israel bias and insisted that the Trump administration would champion human rights.
“We will never give up the cause of universal human rights,” she told an audience at the Graduate Institute of Geneva.
Her remarks here, home to the United Nations Human Rights Council, where she also spoke on Tuesday, were at times in sharp contrast to the statements and actions of other senior Trump administration officials, and her audience at times pushed back, pointing out inconsistencies.
Trump administration officials, on a visit last month to Saudi Arabia, made clear that they would play down human rights with important trade and defense partners. President Trump also threw his weight behind the Saudis in recent days, suggesting on Twitter that he had personally leaned on Riyadh to sever diplomatic ties with Qatar.
“I will continue to call out Saudi Arabia,” Ms. Haley said in a question-and-answer section of her Geneva Institute speech. “The administration is allowing me to say it.”
Ms. Haley stopped short of saying whether the United States would remain in the 47-member Human Rights Council, the intergovernmental body of the United Nations that is supposed to promote and protect human rights. She did, however, demand two significant changes in how it operates.
She called for a way to prevent rights abusers from winning seats on the council. Currently, regional blocs of countries often rally around one nation to represent them. And she insisted that the council stop passing “biased” resolutions against Israel.
“America does not seek to leave the Human Rights Council,” Ms. Haley said. “We seek to re-establish the council’s legitimacy.” Pressed by the audience, she would not commit to staying or leaving.
Ms. Haley assailed Cuba, Iran and Venezuela for their repression of citizens, and in one part of her speech at the institute, she included Saudi Arabia on a list of countries that hold elected seats on the Human Rights Council even though they do not uphold the “highest standards” of human rights at home.
Before Ms. Haley addressed the institute, she spoke at the council in the first high-level engagement between it and the United States since Mr. Trump took office.
The American Civil Liberties Union said in a statement that the Trump administration should focus on protecting rights in the United States. “It’s hard to take Ambassador Haley seriously on U.S. support for human rights in light of Trump administration actions like the Muslim ban and immigration crackdowns,” said Jamil Dakwar, director of the group’s human rights program.
Less than a week after Mr. Trump said he would withdraw the United States from the Paris climate accord, drawing criticism for surrendering the country’s global leadership role on climate change, Ms. Haley’s statements were seen as a test of where human rights stand in the Trump administration’s “America first” policy.
Ms. Haley, in a three-minute statement at the opening of a Human Rights Council session, singled out Venezuela, calling on the country to voluntarily surrender membership until it had “set its house in order.”
Ms. Haley said it was hard to accept that the council had passed five resolutions against Israel in March but had never passed a resolution against Venezuela, where the government has cracked down on the opposition amid an economic crisis. “It is essential the council address its chronic anti-Israel bias if it’s to have any credibility,” she said.
Ms. Haley also questioned whether “the Human Rights Council even supports human rights or is merely a showcase for dictatorships that use their membership to whitewash their brutality.”
Addressing the council before Ms. Haley spoke, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, also focused attention on abuses by member countries, expressing concern at “the brazen absence of shame being paraded by a growing number of politicians worldwide.”
“When thuglike leaders ride to power, democratically or otherwise, and openly defy not only their own laws and constitutions but also their obligations under international law, where is their shame?” he asked.
Eight rights organizations wrote to Ms. Haley last month highlighting the importance of the United States’ leadership role and its ability to change the council’s practices and its approach toward Israel.
The council was perhaps least effective from 2006 to 2009, when the administration of President George W. Bush disengaged, the rights groups pointed out. Conversely, after re-engagement under President Barack Obama, the percentage of resolutions centered on Israel declined and the council focused on other issues. The United States spurred action on atrocities in Sri Lanka, for example; helped push for the appointment of an expert to monitor human rights in Iran; and steered resolutions on freedom of expression and religion.
“What is certain is that the departure of the U.S. from the Human Rights Council would only result in worse, and perhaps even pernicious, outcomes,” the rights organizations said in their letter.
