Turkey, Facing Disunity Under Erdogan, Finds an Enemy in Europe
ISTANBUL — In the small hours of the last Friday in January, three bullets hit the side of Muharrem Dogan’s white Fiat as he drove through an Istanbul suburb. One struck just above the front left wheel. Another hit the bottom of the car’s frame. The third entered the driver’s door and narrowly missed Mr. Dogan’s aorta, lungs and heart before coming to a halt next to his liver.
Mr. Dogan, 21, did not see the gunman, and a group of people suspected of the crime have been released. But Mr. Dogan, who is campaigning for a vote against the expansion of the Turkish president’s powers in an April referendum, thinks he knows who did it.
At the time of the attack, he was driving with a group of fellow “no” campaigners. And he believes his attacker was from an armed gang who, just an hour earlier, had torn down his colleagues’ campaign posters on the same street and chased them across the neighborhood. “This was an obvious threat,” Mr. Dogan said in an interview on Monday. “It was a message to people who might vote no.”
Amid a tight race that the government fears it might lose, Turkey has in recent days condemned attempts by the Netherlands and several other European countries to stop its ministers from holding referendum rallies for the Continent’s Turkish diaspora. This spat worsened on Monday after Turkish officials said the Dutch ambassador to Turkey, who is currently away from the country, should not return — and threatened to reassess a deal with Europe that has stemmed the flow of migrants to the Continent.
By complaining about the hypocrisy of liberal governments’ suppressing speech, some analysts say, the government is whipping up nationalist sentiments at home to build support for the “yes” vote.
But within Turkey, the government has been called hypocritical for demanding greater freedom for its surrogates overseas while restricting the same freedoms for its opponents in Turkey.
There is no suggestion that the government organized the shooting of Mr. Dogan. But the Turkish government is accused of creating an environment in which its supporters have license to intimidate those who, like Mr. Dogan, are campaigning against the proposed expansion of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s powers in the referendum.
On April 16, Mr. Erdogan hopes a majority of Turks will vote for a new style of presidency that he says will make him accountable, streamline lawmaking and increase political stability.
His opponents fear it will instead usher in an era of one-man rule — a stance given credibility on Monday by the Venice Commission, a group of legal experts who advise the leaders of 61 member states, including Turkey. On Monday the commission’s latest report argued that the proposed system would give the president excessive power. It was a conclusion that the European Union then implied might harm Turkey’s chances of joining its ranks, since bloc members must adhere to basic democratic standards.
For opposition members like Mr. Dogan, those standards have already been eroded by the intimidation of those campaigning against the constitutional change. In addition to purging more than 120,000 dissidents and alleged plotters since a failed coup last July, Mr. Erdogan and his colleagues have at times implied that “no” voters might be supporters of the coup or serve the interests of Kurdish terrorists.
Mr. Erdogan’s government strongly denies that any restrictions have been placed on the “no” campaign. “They’re campaigning very freely,” Ibrahim Kalin, Mr. Erdogan’s spokesman, said at a briefing for foreign journalists last week. “We’re not forcing anyone to vote yes or no,” he later added. “We are running a campaign just like any other campaign.”
Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the leader of the largest opposition party, says that private news media outlets are reluctant to broadcast his speeches or interview his colleagues because of pressure from the government.
Mr. Kalin disputes this. “How many rallies has he held so far?” Mr. Kalin asked. “A lot. How many TV appearances did he have? Many, and he’s the main champion of the ‘no’ campaign, and he’s been campaigning very freely.”
Critics of the government disagree. “The forthcoming April poll in Turkey will be the first unfair — and at least partially unfree — election in the country since Turkey became a multiparty democracy in 1950,” said Soner Cagaptay, the director of the Turkish Research Program at the Washington Institute, an American think tank.
Yet while the political landscape may be newly treacherous, some analysts say Mr. Erdogan’s aggressive discourse and his disputes with an array of perceived enemies are strikingly similar to an approach he took in 2015. Then, they say, after a disappointing result in one general election, he reversed his political fortunes by reigniting a conflict with Kurdish insurgents and won a second snap poll later in the year.
Now, Mr. Erdogan has picked a fight with Europe in a similar effort to inflame nationalist-minded voters, this time to back him in the referendum, said Ozgur Unluhisarcikli, the director of the Ankara office of the German Marshall Fund of the United States.
By establishing Europe as an external threat, Mr. Erdogan hopes to convince not just those from his own natural constituency, but also those from Turkey’s fourth-largest political grouping, the Nationalist Movement Party. Though that party’s leadership has given its backing to Mr. Erdogan, its rank and file is thought to be more wary.
“In the 2015 elections, as in past elections, President Erdogan identified enemies of the nation and asked voters to vote for him so that he can effectively deal with these enemies,” Mr. Unluhisarcikli said. “Again in this referendum he’s asking voters to vote yes, to create a strong executive, so that this strong executive can deal with these enemies of the nation.”
The difference in this electoral cycle is that he has established Europe as a central boogeyman, in addition to internal foes like the organizers of last year’s coup. “They need an enemy that they could not find in Turkey, and they discovered that enemy in Europe,” Mr. Unluhisarcikli said.
Some expect this dynamic to end after the referendum is held. But others fear that it is the start of a permanent shift in Turkey’s outlook, perhaps a final rejection of the goal of joining the European Union.
“The sun rises from the east — no good will come from the West,” Prime Minister Binali Yildirim was quoted in the local news media as saying on Sunday, a comment that bolstered Mr. Cagaptay’s suspicions that the Turkish government is no longer interested in joining the European Union.
“This is a serious crisis that will extend beyond the electoral cycle in Turkey and the Netherlands,” Mr. Cagaptay said on Monday. “It looks to me that Erdogan is simultaneously dynamiting Turkey’s decades-long E.U. accession process, the ongoing story of Turkish immigrants’ integration into Europe and last but not least, Turkey’s age-old ties with Europe.”
