A New Zealand native who joined the Islamic State should not lose his citizenship but may face charges if he returns home, the country’s prime minister said on Monday, outlining a milder approach than Britain and the United States have taken toward citizens with ties to the group.
The New Zealander, Mark Taylor, was widely ridiculed when he forgot to turn off Twitter’s location tagging function in 2014, and inadvertently gave away the positions of Islamic State fighters in Syria.
On Monday, the ABC, Australia’s public broadcaster, quoted Mr. Taylor as saying that he had fled the Islamic State in December and surrendered to Kurdish forces because living with the terrorist group had become too difficult. The ABC said he was being held in a Kurdish prison.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern told reporters on Monday that New Zealand had plans in place for any Islamic State fighters who try to return.
“Mr. Taylor only holds New Zealand citizenship, and the government has an obligation not to make people stateless,” she said, adding that Mr. Taylor was among a small number of New Zealanders who had joined the Islamic State. (She declined to say precisely how many.)
Ms. Ardern said that joining the group was illegal and that Mr. Taylor, who officials say does not appear to have a valid passport or travel documents, could face charges if he returns to New Zealand. To return, he would first have to travel to a country where New Zealand has a diplomatic presence and request an emergency travel document, she said.
Britain and the United States have recently taken a harsher line on citizens trying to return after stints with the Islamic State.
President Trump has said the United States will not readmit Hoda Muthana, an American-born woman who traveled to Syria to join the group and now wants to come home. His administration has also signaled that former Islamic State fighters could be sent to the United States military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
Britain’s home secretary, Sajid Javid, who is in charge of citizenship and immigration, has rebuffed pleas to return from Shamima Begum, a 19-year-old woman who traveled to Syria four years ago to marry an Islamic State fighter.
Ms. Begum has asked to return for the sake of her newborn son, and British law prevents the government from stripping someone’s citizenship if doing so would render the person stateless. But British news outlets have reported that the Home Office decided it could revoke Ms. Begum’s citizenship because her mother has a passport from Bangladesh, which would typically qualify the daughter for citizenship there.
The Home Office said last month that while it could not comment on individual cases, Mr. Javid has the power to deprive a British national of his or her citizenship “in order to protect this country,” so long as doing so does not render the person stateless.
Mr. Taylor, the New Zealander — who is known by his Twitter alias, “Kiwi Jihadi” — traveled to Syria in 2014. He told the ABC that he had worked as a guard on the border between territory controlled by the Islamic State and the Syrian government.
“There’s a difference between fighting and guarding,” he said. “Guarding, you don’t need to plan anything; attacking, you need to make preparations.”
Mr. Taylor appeared in an Islamic State promotional video that called for attacks on celebrations in Australia and New Zealand for Anzac Day, a holiday that commemorates those countries’ citizens who died in overseas wars. He told the ABC that he had witnessed several beheadings and executions during his time with the group.
He also said he that expected New Zealand to eventually take him back, but that he would probably need to spend “a couple of years” in prison.
“I’m sorry for causing too much trouble and being a bit hotheaded and flamboyant in my approach,” said Mr. Taylor, who also goes by the names Muhammad Daniel and Abu Abdul-Rahman.
Mr. Taylor said that he regretted not being able to afford a female slave from the Yazidi ethnic minority.
Islamic State fighters enslaved, raped and killed thousands of Yazidis after storming their communities in Iraq’s Sinjar region in 2014. The systematic rape of Yazidi women and girls eventually became deeply enmeshed in the group’s radical theology.
