Did German Spy Chief Downplay Far-Right Violence? Parliament Wants to Know
BERLIN — Germany’s head of domestic intelligence was accused by lawmakers of playing down far-right violence by questioning the authenticity of a video showing a foreigner being chased during anti-immigrant protests.
Hans-Georg Maassen, who oversees the intelligence agency, had to explain his statements before two closed parliamentary committees on Wednesday as calls for his resignation intensified among politicians and pundits.
In an interview published Friday, Mr. Maassen directly contradicted Chancellor Angela Merkel when he said that he had “no evidence” for the widely reported “hounding” of dark-skinned bystanders during far-right protests in the eastern city of Chemnitz two weeks ago. The term “hounding” was used by the chancellor and the government spokesman to describe the events.
But Mr. Maassen said he had reason to believe that a widely circulated video clip — which showed a white man chasing a darker-skinned young man down the street — constituted “targeted misinformation.” When he was ordered by the government to provide evidence for his comments, Mr. Maassen changed his stance.
In an internal government report that was leaked on Wednesday, Mr. Maassen said that he had been misunderstood and that he had never said the video was “fake, forged or manipulated.” But he still questioned the use of the term “hounding” to describe what the footage showed.
Mr. Maassen said in the leaked report that the “burden of proof” to demonstrate that the video documents people being hounded in Chemnitz did not lie with him, “but with the creator of the video.”
The riotous marches in Chemnitz in late August shocked much of Germany and raised concern about a far-right that has become bolder, stronger and better organized. The rallies by several extremist groups, joined by thousands of ordinary citizens, came after a German man was killed in Chemnitz, allegedly by two asylum seekers from Iraq and Syria, who are now in police custody.
During the marches, some protesters flashed Hitler salutes and shouted anti-immigrant slogans; others chased foreigners through the streets and attacked police officers and journalists, according to numerous witness accounts.
Since then, there have been smaller outbreaks of violent protests in other cities. In Köthen, another eastern town, far-right groups organized a march last weekend following the death of a 22-year-old man after an apparent altercation with two Afghans, who have been arrested.
In Köthen, too, a controversy was developing over what constituted fact and fiction. A member of the far-right Alternative for Germany party challenged an official report that said the victim had died of a heart attack following the attack, rather than as a result of the injuries.
Some politicians have accused Mr. Maassen of eroding trust in the government at a time when the country is bitterly divided over migration.
“Especially in times of so-called fake news and conspiracy theories, it’s the duty of government officials to provide clarity and certainty instead of taking part in speculation or even start it,” said Boris Pistorius, the interior minister of the state of Lower Saxony and a Social Democrat.
Mr. Maassen, who has run the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution for six years, as the domestic intelligence agency is known, has made no secret of his disagreement with Ms. Merkel’s immigration policy.
Critics of Mr. Maassen have said his statements legitimized allegations by far-right groups that the manhunts of foreigners by gangs in Chemnitz had never taken place.
“We have seen pictures. We have heard witnesses. We have seen how people openly displayed the Hitler salute on the streets,” Thomas Oppermann, a Social Democrat and a vice president of the Bundestag, Germany’s Parliament, said in a recent radio interview.
Mr. Maassen reports to Germany’s interior minister, Horst Seehofer, a Bavarian conservative who is also openly hostile to Ms. Merkel’s migration policy and who, earlier in the year, almost brought down the coalition over the issue.
Robert Habeck, the leader of the Greens, has called on Mr. Seehofer to “immediately fire” Mr. Maassen — and for Ms. Merkel to fire Mr. Seehofer, if he did not.
But with her governing coalition relying on the Bavarian conservatives led by Mr. Seehofer, Ms. Merkel’s hands are tied.
“She should fire both but she can’t,” said Jens Hacke, a prominent political scientist and author.
Following Wednesday’s parliamentary hearings, some in the conservative camp softened their criticism of Mr. Maassen.
“In my view, Mr. Maassen laid out convincingly that his intention, his motivation, was to calm the situation down” by avoiding “dramatic language,” said Armin Schuster, a member of Ms. Merkel’s Christian Democrats, who had been among those questioning Mr. Maassen. “I still criticize how he went about it,” Mr. Schuster added. B ut demands for his resignation were “disproportionate,” he said.
Others seemed unconvinced.
“Especially in times like these, the intelligence agency and its president play a very sensitive and important role,” said Uli Grötsch, a Social Democrat who was also inside the hearing. Part of Mr. Maassen’s job, he said, was to maintain people’s trust in the authorities.
“This trust was damaged by Mr. Maassen’s actions,” he said.
