Touring the Israeli Occupation  Young U.S. Jews Get an Unflinching View
PSAGOT, West Bank — The fun was over before the tour bus rolled into Har Gilo.
For the past week, 28 college students from the United States had been taking part in a traveling experiment billed as an alternative to Birthright Israel, whose free trips to the country have become a rite of passage for hundreds of thousands of young American Jews.
Birthright’s avoidance of the Israeli occupation of the West Bank has made it the target of angry protests by left-leaning Jewish activists. But for sheer ambition, no critique has approached this week’s attempt by the liberal lobbying group J Street to map out an alternative route for Birthright’s tours.
The organizers said they embraced Birthright’s goal of helping young American Jews connect with Israel and with their Jewishness, but that they also needed to be exposed to the realities of the occupation.
On Sunday, after several upbeat days hiking in the Galilee, learning about the kibbutz movement and bonding over buffets and Israeli pop songs, the J Street cohort took a sharp left turn into territory where Birthright does not go.
In the West Bank settlement of Har Gilo, they received a harsh history lesson from a veteran opponent of the occupation. Then they toured an impoverished, water-starved Palestinian village that Israeli settlers want to demolish, and visited the city of Hebron, where repeated outbreaks of violence have turned an entire Palestinian business district into a ghost town.
Adam DeSchriver, 21, a clarinet student at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, N.Y., said he had been wowed on the trip’s first few days by the “renaissance of Hebrew culture” he discovered in Israel.
“What breaks my heart,” he said after Sunday’s eye-opening itinerary, “is seeing it at the expense of others.”
Birthright officials say their trips do address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to a limited extent, but that it is not their focus.
Birthright’s goal is “to strengthen Jewish identity and foster a love for the land, people and culture of Israel,” said Pamela Fertel Weinstein, a spokeswoman for the group. Travelers more interested in the conflict, she said, are free to stay on in Israel to learn about it on their own.
The organizers of the J Street trip, called “Let Our People Know,” said newcomers to Israel also needed to understand the experiences of Palestinians living under Israeli occupation.
“To be raising a generation of American Jews with no knowledge of that? That’s wrong,” said Shira Wolkenfeld, 22, a new graduate of George Washington University and a member of J Street’s student board. “And that’s political. We’re creating a generation who don’t have the knowledge to speak out against it.”
The ride to Har Gilo, just south of Jerusalem, took the bus through an Israeli checkpoint. Hagit Ofran, a leader of Peace Now, addressed the group over a microphone and described how soldiers decided which motorists to stop: “To look suspicious,” she said, “you need to look Arab.”
It was a bracing how-do-you-do for liberals unaccustomed to blunt racial profiling.
But it was atop Har Gilo, peering out over the southern West Bank, that the travelers began to see troubling aspects of a country they had mainly loved from far away.
Down below was the separation barrier, with decorous brickwork beautifying the side facing an Israeli settlement. The Palestinian village on the other side looked upon a crude concrete slab.
Farther downhill was the tunnel road, a bypass highway to speed Israelis to and from their growing settlements, tunneling under Palestinian villages and surfacing between high concrete walls to protect Jewish drivers from potential attacks by Palestinians.
“You don’t feel the occupation when you don’t see it,” Ms. Ofran said.
She was referring to the drivers in the distance, but she could have been referring to the young passengers who climbed back onto their tour bus.
Many of the young people on the tour had been to Israel before, some on Birthright trips, and most were already activists with J Street’s campus arm. But they were still unprepared for Susiya.
There, in the southern Hebron hills, they trudged across dusty, rocky terrain and crowded inside a steaming domicile with cinder-block walls and a tarpaulin roof.
Lunch arrived: Steaming vats of savory rice and trays of cooked vegetables.
The flies were so many, and so impudent, that the students gave up swatting them from their faces.
Nasser Nawajah, a Susiya resident and activist with the Israeli human rights group B’Tselem, told Susiya’s story: Evicted from their old homes just downhill to make way for an Israeli archaeological site, Susiya’s shepherds had set up a ramshackle collection of tents and huts here in their fields, lest their grazing lands be taken from them as well.
An organization of Jewish settlers has sued to compel the army to demolish Susiya, since the tents and huts were built without permits — permits that Israel does not grant to Palestinians across much of the West Bank.
Susiya’s residents were also cut off from their cisterns and barred from digging new ones, Mr. Nawajah said. They asked Israel’s water company, which has a big line just across the street, to install a spigot and a meter so they could pay for water for their families and sheep. It said no, because the village was built illegally. So the villagers truck in water, he said, paying many times what it costs Israelis to drink and bathe.
“How do you fight back?” one of the young visitors asked. International pressure is the only thing that works, Mr. Nawajah said.
“Is there anything we can do?” someone else asked. Pressure the Americans who donate to the settlers, and call your congressmen, Mr. Nawajah said.
“I have to honestly say, the occupation is not just Israeli,” he added. “It’s American as well.”
A quick walk through the divided house of worship above the Cave of the Patriarchs — Muslims on one side, Jews the other, with padlocks and soldiers enforcing the split — set the mood for the group’s visit to Hebron. Jewish settlers were attracted to Hebron by the belief that the cave holds the remains of Adam and Eve, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, and Jacob and Leah.
Outside, Ms. Ofran told of violence including the massacre of 67 Jews in Hebron in 1929, and of 29 Muslims gunned down by a settler as they prayed in 1994, which ushered in a period of Arab suicide bombings.
She was leading the group on a thousand-yard tour along what were once some of Hebron’s main market streets, until Palestinians were forbidden to use them, even to get to their front doors. Today they are a graveyard of abandoned storefronts and apartments, as well as some homes where Ms. Ofran said settlers had moved in illegally after the Arab owners, demoralized by restrictions and harassment, had fled.
“People aren’t kicked out,” she said of the Palestinians who had left. “It’s unbearable to live here.”
At a last checkpoint, Arabs crossed into the Israeli-controlled section, where soldiers protect 800 settlers from the city of 200,000 Palestinians beyond the gate. Pointing up a steep street to an Arab neighborhood, Ms. Ofran said cooking gas could not be delivered there by truck; people had to carry the tanks on their backs.
The only Palestinian vehicle allowed in, she said, was a garbage truck.
“This is all really sad,” said Liyah Foye, 19, a senior at the University of North Carolina-Asheville.
Ms. Foye, who as a black Jew said she had experienced more than her share of bigotry, said she was hit hard by the idea that a “state founded to protect one marginalized group” was oppressing another.
She said she had always loved Israel and seen it as a “beacon of light.” But what she saw on Sunday overwhelmed her: “My joy and my light shouldn’t be coming from someone else’s darkness,” she said.
“After today I can no longer stand by,” she added, saying she wanted to go home and educate American Jews about the Palestinians’ plight. “Even if I’m not oppressing them, I’m still part of the system that is,” she said. “My job is to say to my community, ‘No, this can’t happen.’”
As the day grew long, the facial expressions more pained and the questions more anguished, the J Street tour seemed increasingly incompatible with Birthright’s goal of hooking young American Jews on Israel.
By dinnertime, two participants said they were reconsidering their belief in a Jewish state. Jesse Steshenko, 19, of Santa Cruz, Calif., who has a Star of David tattooed on his right wrist, said he was “disgusted” with Israel’s government.
“I came in here a very ardent Zionist,” he said. “You never know when a Holocaust might happen again. Yet, coming here, I’m starting to doubt whether a two-state solution is possible — and whether Zionism is even worth pursuing anymore.”
Yet Mr. Steshenko also said he had made up his mind to make Israel his home after he graduates from college, “to do the work that I think should be done.”
Yael Patir, J Street’s top official in Israel, pointed to Mr. Steshenko’s decision as a sign of success.
“We knew that their days in the West Bank would be the most challenging and difficult,” she said of the group. “But we also know that it’s the reason they came for the trip.”
There remained the question of how much Birthright itself might borrow from a trip like this, if it chose to.
But Channah Powell, 20, a pre-med student at Tufts University, warned against taking the J Street experiment as a model.
“You can’t just next year have 50,000 kids on a trip like this,” she said. “You have to change the way we’re educating them.” She added that Jewish groups, schools and synagogues needed to teach their young people about the occupation, not merely wait or pray for it to end.
“American Jewish kids,” Ms. Powell said, “have to be able to come on a trip like this without feeling so blindsided.”
