U.S. Accuses Iran of ‘Nuclear Extortion’ and Vows More Sanctions
BRUSSELS — The United States on Wednesday accused Iran of “nuclear extortion” and threatened further sanctions against Tehran, which has begun stockpiling and enriching uranium beyond the limits set in the 2015 accord that President Trump has abandoned.
The United States called an emergency meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna on Wednesday in response to the Iranian moves, while a senior French envoy was in Tehran exploring ways to reopen negotiations on compliance with the deal.
Both Iran and the United States insist that they are open to further negotiations, but both have put different conditions on new talks. Washington insists that they must prevent Iran’s development of a weapons program and restrict Iran’s involvement with regional allies, while Iran insists that Washington must first rejoin the deal Mr. Trump renounced in 2018 and remove sanctions that are strangling Iranian oil exports.
At the Vienna meeting, the American ambassador, Jackie Wolcott, said  that “there is no credible reason for Iran to expand its nuclear program, and there is no way to read this as anything other than a crude and transparent attempt to extort payments from the international community.” The only path to sanctions relief, she said, is “through negotiations, not nuclear extortion.”
Later Wednesday, President Trump wrote on Twitter that sanctions against Iran would soon be “increased substantially” and charged that “Iran has long been secretly ‘enriching,’ in total violation” of the 2015 deal.
It was not clear on what basis Mr. Trump made that charge. The International Atomic Energy Agency, which conducts a strict inspection of Iran’s nuclear program under the deal, has discovered no secret enrichment program.
Iran’s ambassador to the agency, Kazim Gharib Abadi, responded to Mr. Trump by saying in Vienna that all Iran’s nuclear activities are monitored by the agency, and “we have nothing to hide.”
Iran has repeatedly stated it does not want nuclear weapons. It has moved carefully beyond the enrichment limits of the deal in response to the American reimposition of sanctions and especially Washington’s decision in late April to end the waivers it had given eight countries to continue to buy Iranian oil.
The decision was made against the advice of the State Department, according to a former diplomat, Dennis Ross, who said it favored longer-term pressure on Iran while trying to keep the country inside the limits of the deal. But since the decision, Iran’s oil exports, on which much of the economy depends, have fallen from roughly a million barrels a day to roughly 300,000.
Iran says that it will further increase uranium enrichment and take other unspecified steps that will not be reversed until it achieves “full rights” under the deal. Iran has demanded that the other participants — Britain, France, Germany, Russia, China and the European Union — satisfy their obligations to aid Iran’s economy.
But American sanctions, which threaten punishment against countries that do business with Iran, have made trade almost impossible.
While China continues to buy some Iranian oil, the Europeans have instead created a barter system for trade that aims to bypass restrictions on dollar-denominated transactions imposed by the American sanctions. But the barter system, known as Instex, has not yet completed its first transaction. And it has been heavily criticized by Iranian officials as no substitute for the surge in business they had expected under the nuclear agreement. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has called Instex “a bitter joke.”
In Vienna, the Europeans issued a joint statement that called on Iran to resume full compliance with the deal “without delay.” It expressed regret over American abandonment of the deal but emphasized again that European “commitment to the nuclear deal, including sanctions lifting for the benefit of the Iranian people, depends on full compliance by Iran.”
At the same time, the Europeans gave no indication of how long they would wait before beginning a process of dispute resolution under the deal, which could lead, after a month or more of further talks, to the reimposition of European sanctions on Iran.
Iran is clearly trying to calibrate its moves to avoid that outcome, trapping the Europeans between Washington and Tehran.
France has been particularly tough on Iran, wanting to ensure nuclear nonproliferation, but also wanting to bring Washington back into talks and calm the issue down before it leads to military conflict.
The French presidential envoy, Emmanuel Bonne, met Wednesday with key Iranian figures. Ali Shamkhani, head of Iran’s national security council, told him that the country’s decision to reduce its nuclear commitments “step by step” is an “unchangeable strategy,” according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency, and he went on to criticize European countries for their “lack of will” in providing relief from American sanctions.
But President Hassan Rouhani of Iran told Mr. Bonne that “Iran has fully left the path open for diplomacy and negotiation,” according to the presidential website. Mr. Rouhani said that Iran seeks “full implementation” of commitments by all parties. “If signatories to the deal implement their commitments, Iran also will take new steps.”
Last week Mr. Rouhani also said that Iran’s actions thus far were fully reversible, saying: “All our actions can be returned to the previous condition within one hour.”
The diplomatic maneuverings reflected Iran’s efforts to pressure the Europeans to deliver more economic benefits and Washington to rejoin the nuclear agreement and lift sanctions. Iran has not yet said what further actions it may take, though it promises more in early September if conditions do not change.
Mr. Ross, the former American official, suggested in an article in the Atlantic that productive talks could revolve around Iran agreeing to extend time limits for another 10 or 15 years on its compliance with the deal and limiting its arms exports to allies in the region while the United States would lift sanctions and agree to a special trading system whereby American and foreign firms could do business in Iran subject to a set of regulations.
