Georgian Court Sentences Mikheil Saakashvili in Absentia to 3 Years in Prison
KIEV, Ukraine — A Georgian court on Friday sentenced former President Mikheil Saakashvili to three years in prison for abusing his pardon powers while serving as president. Mr. Saakashvili, who is now in Ukraine, was sentenced in absentia.
Mr. Saakashvili’s legal woes have been piling up in both his adopted country, Ukraine, and his homeland, Georgia, but the ruling is the first time he has been sentenced to prison.
In a Facebook post on Friday, he called the ruling, and the flurry of cases against him more broadly, a response to his efforts to fight corruption and “oligarchs” in both countries.
A gregarious populist and an avowed enemy of Russian influence in former Soviet states, Mr. Saakashvili has cast himself as a fighter for good government and pluralistic democracy, and he has said that the criminal cases against him are pushback from an entrenched, corrupt elite. Detractors call him a showboating has-been.
Georgian authorities accuse him of abusing his power, and Ukraine has stripped him of his citizenship for making false statements on a form.
After stepping down as president in 2013, and a brief retirement in Brooklyn, Mr. Saakashvili supported the Ukrainian revolution the following year. Petro O. Poroshenko, who became Ukraine’s president after the ouster of Viktor F. Yanukovych, rewarded him with citizenship and a position as regional governor in Odessa.
That relationship soured, though, after Mr. Saakashvili accused Ukrainian cabinet ministers and Mr. Poroshenko of corruption. While the Georgian government has sought his extradition for years, his troubles in Ukraine make that prospect more likely.
In the Georgian court on Friday, Mr. Saakashvili was convicted of pardoning four police officers in 2008 without going through the presidential commission on pardons, Civil.ge, a Georgian news portal, reported.
The pardons, prosecutors contended, were part of a scheme to cover up eviden
