This story was updated on Nov. 5, 2018. 
The dirty work of democracy is often compared to the making of sausages, but Australians almost take that maxim literally — turning Election Day into a countrywide barbecue, in which the grilling of hot dogs is optional but voting is compulsory.
More than 96 percent of eligible Australians are enrolled to vote. Of those, more than 90 percent typically turn out to cast ballots for a federal election, far more than the 55 percent of eligible Americans who participated in the 2016 presidential election. 
Australians are induced to vote with both sticks and carrots. Shirkers can be fined up to nearly 80 Australian dollars if they fail to show at the polls. But voting, which always takes place on a Saturday, is also made easy and efficient, and is often accompanied by a community barbecue that includes eating what locals affectionately call “democracy sausages.” 
As Americans prepare to vote in the midterm elections on Nov. 6, we asked our readers in Australia to share their experiences and feelings about compulsory voting and explain the ins and outs of the process. 
[Sign up for the Australia Letter, a weekly dispatch from our Australia bureau chief, Damien Cave.]
Since 1924, Australian citizens over the age of 18 have been required to vote in federal elections, by-elections and referendums. (It was only in 1984, however, that voting became compulsory for Indigenous Australians.) In the decades since, overall voter turnout has never dipped below 90 percent, although there has been a slight downward trend in recent years. 
Other countries that require citizens to vote include Argentina, Egypt, Singapore, Switzerland (in one canton only) and Turkey. 
Unlike in the United States, where voters must cram in a trip to the polls on a workday, federal elections and by-elections in Australia are always held on a Saturday. 
There are also plenty of ways to vote if you cannot make it to your polling place, including postal ballots and overseas embassies. 
Voting is a legal requirement and failure to do so comes with a penalty. 
 Fines range from 20 Australian dollars for missing a federal election, up to 79 Australian dollars for skipping a state poll.
 Voters, however, are allowed to appeal a fine and explain why they failed to participate.
Some Americans view a refusal to participate in the polls as a protest and therefore a kind of vote in itself. 
Australian critics of compulsory voting argue that as free citizens they should be allowed to choose whether to participate. Others argue that forcing apathetic or uneducated citizens to vote steers the nation’s political destiny toward populism. 
But according to political scientists, the opposite is more likely true: Forcing people to engage in the process increases their knowledge of the issues and candidates. 
Voters are compelled to appear at the polls, but they can cast a blank or marred ballot as a protest, which doesn’t count. Some apathetic voters simply number the boxes in the order the candidates appear, which does count and is known as a “donkey vote.” 
Many of the Australian readers who responded to our questions professed their love for a tradition that goes hand in hand with voting: democracy sausages. 
Local community groups often raise money by setting up a grill at polling places to sell sausages wrapped in a slice of bread. 
One voter, Sophie Kunze from Penrith, New South Wales, shared her biggest gripe with the Australian system: “More vegetarian options at the sausage sizzles,” she wrote. “Democracy sausages are for everyone.”
Marie Tae McDermott contributed research.
