North Korean Missile Delivers a Message  There’s Little Japan Can Do
TOKYO — The North Korean missile that landed in Japanese waters on Wednesday offered another stark reminder of the threat posed to Japan by the kinds of short-range weapons that the North has been testing in recent months.
Yet there are clear limits to what Japan can do about it. The launch reinforced how deeply Japan has been sidelined as President Trump tries to get nuclear talks with North Korea back on track, brushing off Pyongyang’s string of missile tests in the process.
The ballistic missile launched early Wednesday was the first to splash down in Japan’s exclusive economic zone, which extends 200 miles off its coast, in nearly two years.
North Korea’s official news agency said Thursday that a submarine had fired the missile, corroborating the suspicions of South Korea’s military, which said the missile had been launched from the sea.
[After this article was published, the Defense Department in Washington said it also had concluded that the missile was launched from the sea.]
It has been three years since North Korea last tested submarine-delivered missiles, which pose a particularly serious challenge because they are harder to detect and extend the range of the North’s arsenal.
The launch recalled another, more provocative test in 2017 in which North Korea fired a missile  over Japan’s northernmost main island, prompting the government to send out alarms on cellphones and interrupt television programs to urge residents to take cover.
The latest launch prompted no such warnings. But the test, coming just hours after North Korea announced that it was resuming long-stalled negotiations with the United States, was a clear escalation designed to show both the North’s technical advances and the tough stance it will take in the talks, analysts said.
“They have made clear in the past that they want to see some substantive deal by the end of the year ‘or else,’” said Alexandra Bell, senior policy director at the Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation. “They have not described what that ‘or else’ is, but I would see this launch as a preview of what could happen if they don’t see something in the way of sanctions relief or an interim agreement.”
Japan has said it will install a land-based system, known as Aegis Ashore, that can intercept missiles. But on the diplomatic front, the country has mostly been an afterthought as the United States has engaged with North Korea.
Japanese leaders must walk a fine line as Mr. Trump seeks with Pyongyang the sort
