First Barr, Now Pompeo  Italy Is Hub of Impeachment Intrigue for Trump Officials
ROME — The “ancestral homeland” in Italy’s Abruzzo region that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said he was looking forward to visiting on Thursday barely had enough notice to organize a welcoming ceremony.
“It all happened so fast,” said Guido Angelilli, the mayor of Pacentro, adding, “They asked us to keep a low profile.”
At least the mayor could acknowledge the visit was happening at all, a small consolation in these times of high-flying intrigue.
As Washington seethes amid accusations of quid pro quos, conspiracy theories and abuses of power, Italy, with its brilliant early autumn light and amenable political leaders, has become a recent destination for two central officials in the Trump administration who are in the thick of the impeachment inquiry.
Their comings and goings have provoked some consternation, and more than a little speculation, in the Italian media. The Italian government has so far refused to say a word about a trip to the capital last week by Attorney General William P. Barr to meet with Italian intelligence officers as part of President Trump’s efforts to discredit the investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 United States election.
[Echoes of Benghazi criticism and anger confront Pompeo in the Ukraine inquiry.]
On Wednesday, Mr. Pompeo confirmed in a news conference in Rome that “I was on the phone call” between President Trump and the president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelensky, that is at the heart of an impeachment inquiry into Mr. Trump. But he also said “I am looking forward to meeting all my cousins” during his visit to Pacentro on Thursday.
Mr. Pompeo’s trip to Italy, which includes a meeting with Pope Francis on Thursday, has been on his official calendar for weeks, and it has focused on tariffs, Libya and Iran sanctions.
But Mr. Pompeo couldn’t escape the impeachment inquiry consuming Washington as he dashed off an angry letter to House Democrats who had issued subpoenas on an expedited timetable to State Department officials involved with Ukraine. (“That’s unacceptable,” he said Wednesday.)
The visit, however, could also serve as a welcome getaway from the impeachment inquiry, at least for a day.
Mr. Pompeo has carved out time to drive east to Pacentro, his great-grandfather’s hometown, where Mr. Angelilli said the Trump official is the second most famous export after Gaetano Ciccone, the paternal grandfather of Madonna.
Mr. Pompeo’s maternal side traces back to nearby Caramanico Terme, which in 2017 seized on his elevation to director of the C.I.A. to enlist his help in solving the great cold case of 1950.
“Unknown thieves stole the ancient statue of Our Lady of the Assumption,” the then-mayor wrote to Mr. Pompeo, imploring his assistance. “We hope you will not find our request inappropriate or strange.”
A
