Singapore Orders Expulsion of American Academic
BANGKOK — Singapore has ordered the expulsion of a noted American academic for what it said was his covert effort to influence Singapore’s foreign policy on behalf of an unnamed foreign government.
The academic, Huang Jing, was accused of passing “privileged information” to senior Singapore officials with the intent of affecting their decisions. He was quickly removed from his position as the Lee Foundation professor on United States-China relations at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy.
“He did this in collaboration with foreign intelligence agents,” the Singapore Ministry of Home Affairs said in a statement on Friday that announced the order. “This amounts to subversion and foreign interference in Singapore’s domestic politics.”
Mr. Huang has held posts at the Brookings Institution, Stanford University and Harvard University. Some view his academic writings as pro-Chinese.
Mr. Huang declined to answer questions from The New York Times about his expulsion, but in comments to other news media, he expressed uncertainty about whether he had been accused of aiding Beijing or Washington.
“It’s nonsense to identify me as ‘an agent of influence’ for a foreign country,” he told The South China Morning Post. “And why didn’t they identify which foreign country they’re referring to? Is it the U.S. or China?”
“My family and my home are all here,” he added. “I have property in Singapore, too. How can they treat me like this? If they have evidence, they should take me to court.”
The United States counts Singapore as a close ally, but the city-state of 5.8 million people also has generally maintained good relations with China, its largest trading partner. Ethnic Chinese make up about three-quarters of Singapore’s population and hold most key positions in government.
In recent months, however, the two Asian nations have exchanged words over control of the South China Sea and China’s seizure in Hong Kong of Singapore military equipment that was en route from Taiwan.
According to one person close to the Lee Kuan Yew School, Mr. Huang’s troubles began after he submitted an academic paper to a school administrator, who then passed it on to high-level officials.
This appears to be the origin of the charge that Mr. Huang had used his position “to deliberately and covertly advance the agenda of a foreign country at Singapore’s expense.”
The clear intention was to use the information to cause the Singapore government to change its foreign policy, the ministry said, but the government did not act on the “privileged information.”
Mr. Huang’s wife, Shirley Yang Xiuping, was also ordered to leave Singapore. The ministry said she had been aware that her husband was using his position to advance the interests of a foreign country.
The ministry identified both as American citizens. It said that their continued presence in Singapore was “undesirable” and that they would be permanently barred from re-entering. Singapore did not announce a deadline for the couple’s departure.
At the Lee Kuan Yew School, Mr. Huang had been director of the Center on Asia and Globalization until June. As of Saturday, his biography page had been removed from the school’s website.
In the preface to one of his books, Mr. Huang writes about his early years in China, where he says he was sent to Yunnan Province for “re-education” as a teenager in the 1970s.
He studied history and English at Fudan University and Sichuan University before earning a Ph.D. in government at Harvard, according to a screenshot of the deleted web page.
