Shimon Peres, in Memoir, Takes On Israel Past and Future
JAFFA, Israel — The ousted French prime minister had just signed the letter authorizing the sale of a nuclear reactor to Israel — for peaceful purposes, he had been assured — even though he no longer had the authority to do so.
It was the morning after Maurice Bourgès-Maunoury’s government fell in late 1957. To get around the problem, he wrote the previous day’s date at the top of the page as an anxious Shimon Peres, then the ever-resourceful director general of Israel’s Ministry of Defense, looked on.
“I asked no questions,” Mr. Peres, who went on to serve as prime minister and president, related six decades after the event. “I said nothing at all. What was there to say?” It was, Mr. Peres said, “the most generous display of friendship I had ever known.”
The secret negotiations with the French for the reactor to be built in Dimona were one of the peaks of Mr. Peres’s long career, now distilled in his new memoir, “No Room For Small Dreams: Courage, Imagination and the Making of Modern Israel.” The book, to be published posthumously in English on Tuesday, comes a year after Mr. Peres suffered a severe stroke from which he did not recover. He died just over two weeks later, at 93.
These are the final words of the last of the founding generation of Israeli leaders. But indefatigable dreamer that Mr. Peres was, his book also delivers a pointed, if veiled, message from the grave about the apparent dearth of vision in the present, and it looks to the future.
“We need a generation that sees leadership as a noble cause,” he wrote in his epilogue, “defined not by personal ambition, but by morality and a call to service.”
Mr. Peres recounts episodes he considered the milestones of a life “entwined with the birth and construction of Israel,” as he put it. They are described in vivid detail and, in some cases, for the first time in his own words, and amount to a kind of ideological will and testament.
“He knew that there is a certain amount of time he was given on earth,” Nehemya Peres, Mr. Peres’s younger son, who is known as Chemi, said in a recent interview at the Peres Center for Peace and Innovation, the nongovernmental organization established by his father in Jaffa, on the Mediterranean shore.
Mr. Peres completed work on the book in his final weeks, Chemi Peres said, using it as “his last voice” and as “a call to dream, to dare, to be optimistic, to transition ourselves into a new era.”
Mr. Peres sat and recorded the memoir in English to reach as wide an audience as possible, in the hope, his son said, of inspiring future leaders, innovators and entrepreneurs. Versions will also be published in Hebrew and French.
Mr. Peres played a central role at critical junctures in his country’s history. He helped build defense and weapons stocks and industry, salvaging the economy during the hyperinflation of the 1980s, championing Israel’s high-tech industry and then turning his efforts to peace. The lessons running through the narrative of his memoir are to reach for the impossible and never give up.
The book by no means offers a full accounting or reckoning. Mr. Peres simply does not grapple with the more contentious episodes.
So Mr. Peres, a protégé of David Ben-Gurion, Israel’s first prime minister, describes his exploits procuring weapons for the 1948 war over Israel’s creation, and says the distance between their offices was, for a time, “only the width of a thin piece of plywood.” But he makes no mention of the Palestinians who became refugees, or of the traumatic chapter of the Altalena, the ship organized by Mr. Ben-Gurion’s right-wing rivals to bring fighters and weapons to Israel. It was shelled on Mr. Ben-Gurion’s orders and sunk just off the coast.
Nor does Mr. Peres relate his early support for Jewish settlement in the West Bank or his “Grapes of Wrath” operation in Lebanon when he was prime minister in 1996, when Israeli artillery shells killed more than 100 Lebanese civilians sheltering in a United Nations compound.
“My father was the greatest optimist on earth,” Chemi Peres said. “He believed that the future was the only thing that mattered because the past cannot be changed.” The book, he added, was not meant to settle disputes or disagreements.
Some of Mr. Peres’s most evocative descriptions are of his childhood in a wintry Polish shtetl, where he marveled over his first taste of a Jaffa orange, and of his voyage, at 11, with his mother and brother to what was then the British Mandate for Palestine in 1934. Arriving on a steamship at the port of Jaffa, he recalls his tanned father, who had made the journey two years ahead of them, standing on a small Arab fishing boat in the sparkling waters, coming out to greet them.
Growing up in the Zionist socialist youth movement, Mr. Peres found his political voice and began to emerge as a leader, even as he opted for a pioneering life as a shepherd on a spartan kibbutz, or communal farm, in the Galilee, called Alumot. His powers of persuasion and creative thinking were not lost on the leaders of the movement, and he was soon recruited into public service by Mr. Ben-Gurion.
Mr. Peres describes how, when he was still in his 20s, Mr. Ben-Gurion tasked him with procuring an “extensive shopping list of weapons” when Israel had less than a week’s worth of ammunition on the eve of the 1948 war. Faced with a Western arms embargo, Mr. Peres found a supplier in Czechoslovakia.
After the war he moved to New York to complete his studies and buy weapons on the black market for Israel’s fledgling armed forces. He went to meet dealers in Cuba at midday, only to find they had meant midnight, and bought two decommissioned British destroyers from Colombia, flying in to Cartagena to inspect them in a small plane whose left engine was on fire.
In the early 1960s, in Washington on a mission to buy weapons from the United States government — this time legally — Mr. Peres was unexpectedly invited to meet President John F. Kennedy, who put him on the spot, inquiring about Israeli intentions regarding nuclear weapons. Mr. Peres formed a spontaneous and cryptic answer: “Mr. President, I can tell you most clearly that we shall not be the first to introduce nuclear weapons to the region.”
And that, he relates, was how Israel’s policy of nuclear ambiguity was born. A powerful deterrent, it laid the foundations for peace with Arab nations, he says. “Believing that Israel had the power to destroy them, he writes, “they one by one abandoned their ambitions to destroy us.”
Mr. Peres also details the behind-the-scenes discussions that led to the audacious operation in 1976 to free hostages from Entebbe, Uganda. Mr. Peres, who was defense minister at the time, described how he pushed for the military raid in the face of the rest of the government’s deep skepticism and opposition.
In the final chapter Mr. Peres describes the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, an old rival who once described Mr. Peres as an “indefatigable schemer” for his political manipulations. When the shots rang out Mr. Peres was just yards from Mr. Rabin who, by the end, had become his close ally in the pursuit of peace with the Palestinians.
That mission remained unfulfilled.
