   A fraternity at Texas A&M University is under review after the death of an 18-year-old who had been accepted as a member just days before. 
   A spokesperson confirmed that while Texas A&M’s Phi Gamma Delta (FIJI) chapter is not under investigation by the Office of the Dean of Student Life, they are looking into the fraternity following the Aug. 28 death of Joseph Little. 
   Little, 18, suffered a seizure at his private dorm off-campus in College Station, and died after spending several days in the ICU – a death a Brazos County Justice of the Peace officer reportedly deemed “unnatural.” 
   The office is reviewing FIJI’s weekend activities and looking into whether the chapter broke any official university rules, which include hazing regulations that prohibit organizations from any activities involving alcohol or drugs, and bars fraternities from distributing alcohol to any guest under 21. 
   Meanwhile, a spokesperson for the College Station Police Department said officers were waiting on Little’s autopsy results to determine whether they would investigate. 
   It remains unclear if the incoming freshman was pledging the fraternity or if he had already been initiated as a brother. 
   FIJI received its official charter from Texas A&M in 1979. 
   The university’s Greek Life has been put under the microscope in recent years, as a 2011 investigation by KBTX revealed multiple instances of hazing, dating violence and animal and alcohol abuse. 
   Then, in 2016, the university’s Sigma Nu chapter was suspended after a 19-year-old brother died at the campus fraternity house. 
   Fatal hazing has been something of a hot button issue across the country thanks to a slew of high-profile deaths, including that of Pennsylvania State University sophomore Tim Piazza, who died from injuries suffered during a Beta Theta Pi pledge event in 2017. 
   His family on Wednesday reached a settlement with the fraternity that included an undisclosed payment and the implementation of a 17-point program to make local chapters safer with harsher hazing punishments.   
