Iran Threatens Israel Over Airstrike in Syria
TEHRAN — A senior Iranian foreign policy official warned Israel on Tuesday that its strike on an air base in Syria that killed several Iranians would “not remain without a response,” the Lebanese news channel Al Mayadeen reported.
Seven Iranian military personnel were killed on Monday in the strike on the Tiyas, or T4, air base near Homs, according to the Iranian news agency Tasnim. The semiofficial Fars news agency initially said that three were members of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, but the report was later withdrawn without explanation.
Syria, Iran and Russia have accused Israel of mounting the attack, though Israel has neither confirmed nor denied involvement. Israel has carried out several strikes in Syria in the past, some aimed at stopping what it says is a military buildup by Iran and its regional ally, Hezbollah, along the Syrian-Israeli border.
Along with Russia, Iran has been a crucial ally of Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, supporting his government militarily, financially and politically since a 2011 rebellion turned into a civil war. Iran has since extended its influence in Syria, something Israel views as a threat, leading to building tensions.
In a previous confrontation in February, Israel said it shot down an Iranian drone flying into its airspace on the same day that Syrian antiaircraft fire brought down an Israeli F-16 jet that was attacking the positions of Iran-backed forces in Syria. Iran denied being the source of the drone.
Russia sent a special envoy, Aleksandr Lavrentiev, to Tehran on Tuesday to discuss the strike and “threats of military interference in Syria by the United States,” Iran’s state news agency, IRNA, reported.
President Trump has vowed to respond forcefully to what rescue workers and rights advocates are calling a chemical weapons attack by Syria over the weekend that killed dozens of civilians. On Tuesday, the Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, dismissed the accusations, calling Mr. Trump’s assessment that Iran and Russia shared responsibility for the attack a “cheap shot.”
