BOGOTÁ, Colombia — Venezuela’s dissident attorney general sped away from her headquarters on a motorbike on Saturday as she was being ousted by the country’s new all-powerful assembly, which moved toward a swift consolidation of its power.
“We have asked that she not only be suspended, but removed from her position,” Diosdado Cabello, a powerful member of the assembly, said of the dismissed official, Luisa Ortega. “It was approved unanimously.”
Standing before the group, called the Constituent Assembly, Mr. Cabello proposed that it govern Venezuela for up to two years before presenting the country with a new Constitution that would allow for elections. Members responded with cheers, presumably assenting to the timeline.
For months, Ms. Ortega has been one of the most vocal critics of President Nicolás Maduro from within his own political party. In March, she condemned an attempt by the courts to dissolve the legislature, and she has since said that Mr. Maduro’s crackdown against protesters has gone too far, saying it could constitute crimes against humanity.
Last Sunday, Mr. Maduro held a contentious election to secure control over the country. In the vote, Venezuelans were asked to choose delegates from a list of allies in the governing party who would rewrite the Constitution and rule the nation while they did so. Voters were not given the option of rejecting the plan.
Ms. Ortega had called the vote illegal and tried to block the assembly’s members from being seated. And after a software company that set up voting systems said the tally had been manipulated by at least one million votes, Ms. Ortega said she was opening an investigation.
On Saturday morning, members of the National Guard carrying rifles and shields surrounded her headquarters in the capital, Caracas. Ms. Ortega took to Twitter to call the events a “siege.”
Ms. Ortega tried to enter the building but was blocked by members of the security forces. Video posted on social media sites showed the attorney general looking forlorn while retreating from the area, sandwiched between two men on a motorbike.
“We must continue to fight for freedom and democracy in Venezuela,” she said at a news conference afterward. “This country has lost its freedom.”
On Saturday, international criticism of the new assembly grew. Mercosur, South America’s largest regional trade bloc, suspended Venezuela, citing a “rupture to the democratic order.” Brazil and Colombia both called the country a dictatorship.
On Saturday evening, Venezuelan officials released Leopoldo López back to house arrest. Mr. López, an opposition politician, had been taken to a military prison by intelligence agents on Tuesday, according to his wife Lilian Tintori. It was the second time in a month he had been returned home, where he will continue to serve a sentence of more than 13 years for incitement, among other charges.
Ms. Ortega was replaced by Tarek William Saab, a close deputy of Mr. Maduro’s who has served as the top human rights official.
Mr. Saab has been criticized by members of the opposition for defending the government’s tough sentences for political prisoners.
In the days before the vote, the United States Treasury Department sanctioned Mr. Saab for failing to protect protesters from abuse by the security forces.
“As the ‘People’s Defender,’ it is ostensibly his role to stand up for human rights in Venezuela,” the Treasury statement said. But he and other officials had allowed “rampant violence against opposition protesters.”
The sanctions were imposed on a total of 13 current or former senior Venezuelan officials.
