   Adele can make a full recovery from the voice problems that have recently plagued her, says the renowned surgeon who treated her for a previous vocal-cord affliction. 
   Steven Zeitels, director of the Massachusetts General Hospital Voice Center in Boston, insists that singers with recurring vocal cord problems can recover and come back as strong as ever, or even stronger. 
   "There is no question in my mind these issues can be fixed," said Zeitels, who has treated top vocalists including Roger Daltrey, Steven Tyler, Lionel Richie and Keith Urban. "It is reasonably rare in my practice to ever do a second core surgical procedure on a singer, but it can be done and be successful. 
   "The best analogy is if you think about professional athletes, can they have more than one shoulder or knee operation? Absolutely," said Zeitels, who says he's not allowed to discuss any current medical interactions with Adele. 
   Fans have been concerned about Adele's (inset) future after the platinum-selling chanteuse canceled the final two sold-out shows of her grueling, 12-date "25" tour at London's Wembley Stadium in July. Calling herself "heartbroken," she told fans she had damaged her vocal cords and was "maxed out on steroids." 
   It was an unwelcome flashback for the 29-year-old, who had to abandon her first U.S. tour in 2011 when her vocal cords hemorrhaged. Adele — who had been left unable to speak, let alone hit those famous high notes — ended up under the care of Zeitels, who performed laser surgery on the singer, saving her career. 
   "They put lasers down your throat, cut off the polyp, and kind of laser your hemorrhage back together and fix it," she told CBS in 2012. 
   While her issues may be fixable, whether Adele will ever want to tour again is another question. The singer expressed doubt about it earlier this year, telling the New Zealand Herald in March: "I don't know if I will ever tour again. The only reason I've toured is you. I'm not sure if touring is my bag." 
   Her fans got a boost a couple weeks back when The Sun reported that she was in talks about appearing in an upcoming remake of the English musical "Oliver," starring as Nancy, a kind-hearted prostitute. It would be her first acting role.   
