AUCKLAND, New Zealand — Wetex Kang, a Malay-Chinese immigrant beekeeper, may be the first Asian candidate to represent the Maori Party of New Zealand, but at times he sounds more like a certain American president.
“I think we can make this country great again,” he said last month while driving through the electoral district of Botany in Auckland.
That phrasing is intentional — Mr. Kang says he admires President Trump’s brash ability to grab attention. Like Mr. Trump, Mr. Kang is a political newcomer who at times says exactly what he is thinking. And Mr. Kang calls himself a “semi-self-made millionaire” who believes the country should be run like a business.
But when it comes to policy, his vision of national greatness sounds decidedly different: “I’m standing for a true voice for immigrants. I stand for bridging the inequality in this country, and helping the tangata whenua realize their true potential,” Mr. Kang, 44, said, using the Maori word for the original inhabitants of New Zealand.
For the Maori Party, Mr. Kang’s candidacy for a seat in the House of Representatives, which will be put to a vote on Saturday, is an attempt to see if the party can attract the support of a group outside New Zealand’s mostly white political establishment: the Chinese community. Mr. Kang is campaigning on a platform that promises to address concerns over racial discrimination and tightening immigration policies. And backed by a famous but controversial activist in the Maori nationalism movement, Tame Iti, Mr. Kang’s campaign could be the beginning of a partnership between some of the country’s oldest and newest ethnic communities.
While that alliance may sound unusual, Marama Fox, a co-leader of the Maori Party, which was formed in 2004 to represent indigenous interests, said that its endorsement of Mr. Kang made sense because of a widely shared genealogy.
“We’ve done DNA studies from the Pacific — they link us to Taiwan, to Easter Island,” she said.
She also said that Mr. Kang’s outsider candidacy demonstrated the traditional Maori value of “manaakitanga,” in which newcomers are treated with warmth and hospitality.
Maria Bargh, a political scientist at Victoria University of Wellington, said that, in political terms, Mr. Kang’s candidacy was an intriguing strategy for a party that received only 1.3 percent of the vote in the last general election. “They’re looking for new places to get some votes, basically,” she said.
In many ways, Mr. Kang reflects the amalgam of the multicultural immigrant experience. Born in a fishing village in Malaysian Borneo, he emigrated first to Australia, then to New Zealand as a student with his sister. After graduating with a degree in pharmacology, he worked as a life coach and a nutritionist, and he now has a beekeeping business. He married a white New Zealander, and their two children have Chinese middle and last names. Before he arrived in Australia, he said, he did not speak any English.
He first met Mr. Iti while working as a nutritionist, helping the Maori activist lose weight and become “half the man he was,” Mr. Kang joked.
This year, Mr. Kang casually broached to Mr. Iti the idea of joining the Maori Party. A week later, at Mr. Iti’s urging, he found himself in a candidate training workshop preparing for his first political campaign.
Mr. Iti’s support has been crucial to Mr. Kang’s candidacy. While Mr. Iti is a respected figure in the Maori community, others see him as a radical. In 2007, Mr. Iti was arrested in an antiterrorism raid and later convicted of illegal firearms possession.
“It’s always been on my bucket list,” Mr. Kang said of his entry into politics. But his lack of traditional experience has been apparent. Before an August debate that included Chinese representatives from the National, Labour and People’s Parties, his plan was to provoke his two opponents to “help them be better politicians.”
During the event, Mr. Kang ignored conventional debate structures. He directed questions at the crowd, confronted the assembled politicians about their governing records, and was chastised by moderators for speaking out of turn.
At one point, he pulled a bemused Mr. Iti onstage to make a point about unity, before Mr. Iti retreated amid protest from the other representatives, the moderators and the audience.
“I was not there to debate,” Mr. Kang said as he drove home afterward in a car stuffed with campaign signs. “I was there to be memorable.”
How that memorability will pay off is uncertain. While Mr. Kang is drawing attention, not all of it is positive. Last week, an inquiry by the Electoral Commission cleared him of allegations that his campaign bribed voters with online cash credits. He said the allegations were a smear campaign by people he had turned down for his campaign team.
Analysts do not give Mr. Kang much of a chance to win. But should he succeed, the Maori Party would be well placed to benefit from his ties to the Asian community, which is becoming an increasingly powerful voting bloc. According to the latest New Zealand census, the Chinese population has grown 16 percent since 2006. Two-thirds of them live in Auckland, and the Botany electorate, which Mr. Kang hopes to represent, is almost 40 percent Asian, the highest percentage of Asian residents in the country. Maori and Pacific Island people make up 18 percent of residents there.
According to one government projection, New Zealand’s Asian population will overtake the Maori in about 20 years.
The electorate in Botany, a sprawling, largely residential area broken up by strips of restaurants and shops, was created in 2007 in response to population growth in the area, a spokeswoman for the Electoral Commission said. Botany has always voted overwhelmingly for the governing center-right National Party.
David Soh, the editor of Mandarin Pages, a Chinese-language newspaper in Auckland, said that New Zealand’s prime minister, Bill English, had already visited his office twice this election cycle, a demonstration of the growing influence of Chinese voters.
Mr. Kang has generated a lot of interest in the community, Mr. Soh said. “Immigration, economic growth — those are the Asian values,” he said, adding that “this is a very innovative thing for Maori.”
Even politicians from other parties have been supportive of Mr. Kang’s campaign, possibly because they do not see him as a threat.
“This is a good try on his behalf,” Raymond Huo, a lawmaker with the Labour Party, said before the debate last month. But for Mr. Kang to win, he added, it would be “magical, a miracle.”
Not everyone is convinced by the unified front the Maori Party is presenting. Vivian Zhou, 40, a Chinese resident in Botany, said it was unusual for an Asian to run for the Maori Party. Maori, she said, are treated better than Chinese because they were born in New Zealand. “Because most Chinese immigrated from overseas, they have no background,” she said. “They start over from zero.”
But in a phone interview this week, Mr. Kang said his message had resonated with the Chinese community, who he said felt they had been treated as second-class citizens in New Zealand.
“Oh, they love me,” he said. “I can’t go anywhere without stopping to take photos with people. We’re going to win.”
