SYDNEY, Australia — The police in Tasmania have charged a man with assault after former Prime Minister Tony Abbott said in an interview that a same-sex-marriage supporter had head-butted him Thursday in Hobart.
According to a statement from the Tasmania Police, the man, whose name was not released but who was described as 38 and from North Hobart, was charged with one count of common assault and granted conditional bail. He will appear at Hobart Magistrates Court on Oct. 23, the police said.
Mr. Abbott first described the encounter to  2GB a Sydney radio station: He had been meeting with a local newspaper about his opposition to same-sex marriage, the subject of a nonbinding vote by mail now underway in Australia. As Mr. Abbott walked to his hotel, a man wearing a “Vote Yes” badge yelled his name.
“He says, ‘I want to shake your hand.’ I went over to shake his hand. Then, he head-butted me,” Mr. Abbott said. “Now, he wasn’t good at it, I’ve got to say, but he did make contact.” The exchange left him with a minor swollen lip, he said.
On Friday morning in Hobart, Mr. Abbott repeated his account in a news conference. Mr. Abbott said that a member of his staff grappled with the man, who then ran off. He held up the encounter as an example of ugliness in the debate around the postal vote coming from supporters of same-sex marriage.
“There’s not much love coming from the ‘yes’ quarters towards people who have the temerity to disagree,” he said, referring to their “love is love” motto. “I think we’ve come to a pretty sorry pass if that’s where modern Australia is.”
In a news conference Friday morning, Cmdr. Tony Cerritelli from the Tasmania Police confirmed they were investigating the case and had contacted Mr. Abbott after becoming aware of the claims. Mr. Abbott has filed a formal complaint, and the police were in the process of working to secure security footage, Commander Cerritelli said.
Commander Cerritelli urged anyone who had information about the case to come forward.
When news of the alleged assault emerged, campaigners on both sides roundly condemned acts of violence.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull told 3AW, a Melbourne radio station, on Friday morning that he had spoken to Mr. Abbott and to the federal police commissioner. “This is a disgraceful incident, and I condemn this assault on Tony,” he said, adding, “Any violence coming into our political life is absolutely to be condemned.” He called for those on both sides to exercise “caution and restraint.”
Alex Greenwich, a New South Wales lawmaker who is a co-chairman of the advocacy group Australian Marriage Equality, wrote on Twitter that there was “absolutely no place” for violence in the debate over same-sex marriage.
Bill Shorten, the Labor opposition leader and another supporter of same-sex marriage, also wrote on Twitter that the violence was unacceptable.
The allegations follow reports of other violence. In Brisbane this month, a man was charged with a public nuisance offense, accused of having punched the godson of former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, a “yes” campaign supporter, in the face.
Mr. Abbott is in Tasmania to meet with representatives campaigning against same-sex marriage, including a Tasmanian Liberal Party senator, Eric Abetz.
The results of the same-sex marriage postal survey, which asks whether the law should be changed to allow same-sex couples to marry, will be announced by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Nov. 15.
