MELBOURNE, Australia — Australia’s carefree attitude toward preventive medicine may have met its match: the flu.
The country is reeling from a potent flu season that has had a historically high number of cases in some states, and the resulting fatalities have raised growing alarms. Last week, an 8-year-old girl from Melbourne died from influenza complications — just weeks after a 30-year-old father passed away after getting the flu.
So far this year, more than 166,000 cases of the flu have been reported through September, a sharp increase from 91,000 for all of last year and more than double the average caseload in the last five years, according to the Immunization Coalition. At least 72 people have died from the flu this year.
The deaths — and the numbers — have raised questions about the effectiveness of the vaunted health care system. This month, Michael Gannon, the president of the Australian Medical Association, said the country was “woefully unprepared” for the pandemic flu outbreak and pointed to the low rate at which people receive their flu shots.
The numbers are not flattering: under 10 percent of children get flu vaccinations, said the National Center for Immunization Research and Surveillance. The figure for children in the United States is nearly four times higher.
So, what has left the famed health care system so vulnerable to such a devastating outbreak?
“Up to now, people have had a misconception about what influenza is,” said Dr. Tony Bartone, the vice president of the medical association. “It’s not the common cold; it’s not a grin-and-bear-it situation.”
“That ‘she’ll be right’ attitude is partly responsible,” he added. “We’ve got a culture here that doesn’t really respect having time off work because of the flu. The Australian character is, ‘I’m not going to be bowled over by the flu’ — not give it its due respect.”
In 2010, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States voted to opt for a “universal” flu vaccination, broadening the pool of people in the country considered most at risk. The result? The organization urges that everyone 6 months of age and older receive a flu vaccine each season.
Australia, on the other hand, focuses its messaging on the groups most at risk, like the very young and the elderly. High-risk groups also receive their influenza vaccinations free. The Health Department says “the flu vaccine is recommended for everyone from 6 months of age,” but Dr. Bartone suggested that the government could be more absolute in telling people to get vaccinated.
“Yes, the messaging should really be clearer,” he said. “The only way you can prevent complications from influenza is vaccination. It can show no respect for age or health.”
Antivaccination advocates may affect influenza vaccinations. In May, the Royal Children’s Hospital in Melbourne released research that found that less than a third of Australian parents planned to have their child immunized against the flu this season, with 88 percent saying they were unsure about safety.
“Antivaccination campaigns have created misinformation and confusion in the Australian public,” Dr. Bartone said.
When asked how many Australians had received the influenza vaccination this season, a spokeswoman for the Health and Human Services Department said that for now, the agency had no idea.
That points to a problem: the Australian Immunization Register only began collecting information on adult influenza vaccination rates in September. There are similar gaps in data when it comes to documenting fatalities: the Health and Human Services Department in Victoria has reported 95 influenza-related deaths — a number that, on its own, is larger than national figures.
A spokesman for that department attributed the discrepancy to a possible delay in cases being formally reported, noting that the agency was not normally notified of deaths by influenza.
Dr. Bartone said those examples were warning signs.
“Clearly, we don’t have the reliable sources of information to assist us with predictions regarding future years,” he said. “The more information we collect, the more prepared we will be. It’s a timely message — the need for better collection of primary care data.”
