North Korean Official Blamed for Failed Trump Summit Reappears in Public
SEOUL, South Korea — Kim Yong-chol, a former North Korean spymaster and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s counterpart in recent diplomatic contacts between the North and the United States, resurfaced in public this week, undermining a South Korean newspaper’s report that he was banished to forced labor in a re-education camp.
The conservative Chosun Ilbo, South Korea’s largest daily newspaper, reported on Friday that Mr. Kim had been sent to a re-education camp as part of a political purge of senior North Korean officials held responsible for the breakdown of the second summit meeting held in February between the North’s leader, Kim Jong-un, and President Trump.
But some analysts in South Korea quickly questioned the report, saying that it was unlikely for Kim Yong-chol to have been banished because he was still being cited in the North Korean news media in the weeks after the summit in Hanoi, Vietnam, and had retained his vice chairmanship in the ruling Workers’ Party. They said Mr. Kim’s influence appears to have been curtailed because he lost another key party post: heading the party’s important United Front Department, which manages relations with South Korea, as well as intelligence affairs.
By Monday, it appeared that the skeptical analysts’ assessments were correct.
The North’s official Korean Central News Agency on Monday included Kim Yong-chol’s name on a list of officials who accompanied Kim Jong-un to an art performance given by the wives of military officers on Sunday.
But on a roster of officials attending the event, Kim Yong-chol’s name was listed 10th among 12 officials named. In North Korea’s opaque regime, an official’s status is commonly gauged by his name’s ranking in leadership rosters carried by the state-run news media.
In another telltale sign of his declining influence, Kim Yong-chol was not seen next to Kim Jong-un, as he often used to be, in photos carried by the North Korean news agency on Monday. South Korean media scrutinizing the photos identified the man seated five seats to the left of Kim Jong-un as Kim Yong-chol.
American officials have been cautious in discussing Kim Yong-chol’s fate in public. But analysts in South Korea have generally agreed that Mr. Kim and his negotiating team, which had driven Kim Jong-un’s diplomatic outreach toward Washington since early last year, have been largely sidelined as the North Korean leader sought a scapegoat to blame for his disastrous second meeting with Mr. Trump.
The Hanoi meeting was widely considered a huge embarrassment for Kim Jong-un, who is seen as infallible in his totalitarian state.
During the summit meeting, Kim Jong-un demanded that Mr. Trump lift the most painful international sanctions against his country in return for partially dismantling his country’s nuclear weapons facilities. The meeting collapsed when Mr. Trump insisted on a quick and comprehensive rollback of the North’s entire weapons of mass destruction program before lifting sanctions, leaving Mr. Kim to return home empty-ha
