Five Important Takeaways From China’s National People’s Congress
BEIJING — The annual meeting of China’s legislature, the National People’s Congress, is usually a sleepy, stolid affair. But this year history happened. In the 16-day session that ended on Tuesday, the Communist Party-controlled congress approved changes that could shape China for decades, especially by stretching President Xi Jinping’s hold on power far into the future.
Here are some highlights of our coverage.
Just over a week before the congress started on March 5, the Communist Party dropped a bombshell: that lawmakers would vote on a constitutional amendment lifting a two-term limit on the presidency. Mr. Xi pushed the change through with a speed and secrecy striking even for China.
Read: China Moves to Let Xi Stay in Power by Abolishing Term Limit
Read: How Xi Jinping Made His Power Grab: With Stealth, Speed and Guile
Abolishing term limits showed that Mr. Xi wants to stay in power, unrivaled, far past the decade that his predecessor held office. The political maneuvering confirmed his status as a party titan likened, by some, to Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping. Others see parallels with Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and other modern-day authoritarians.
Read: With Xi’s Power Grab, China Joins New Era of Strongmen
Read: President Xi’s Strongman Rule Raises New Fears of Hostility and Repression
Chinese reaction to abolition of Mr. Xi’s term limit has varied. But all public opinion, pro and con, has been censored — even Winnie the Pooh has fallen under the censors’ net — and proceedings at the legislature were carefully scripted. Still, the melodramatic eye roll of a journalist at a staid news conference upset the stagecraft and flooded the Chinese internet with sly humor.
Read: China’s Censors Ban Winnie the Pooh and the Letter ‘N’ After Xi’s Power Grab
Read: A Reporter Rolled Her Eyes, and China’s Internet Broke
The congress did more than extend Mr. Xi’s power. It approved a government reorganization designed to merge ministries and agencies into more efficient bureaucracies dealing with the environment, resources and finance. Lawmakers also approved a new investigative agency that will entrench Mr. Xi’s anticorruption drive.
Read: China Unveils Superagencies to Fight Pollution and Other Threats to Party Rule
Read: In China, Fears That New Anticorruption Agency Will Be Above the Law
The congress also approved a new lineup of government leaders to work under Mr. Xi in his new term. The notable additions included the new vice president, Wang Qishan, a powerful ally of Mr. Xi who will deal with the Trump administration; a new central bank chief, Yi Gang; and Mr. Xi’s chief economic adviser, Liu He, who will be a vice premier.
Read: Xi Starts New Term in China, With Trusted Deputy to Deal With Trump
Read: China to Name New Central Bank Chief as It Seeks Continuity Amid Change
