Turkish Media Group Bought by Pro-Government Conglomerate
One of Turkey’s leading media groups, Dogan Media Company, was sold to a pro-government Turkish conglomerate on Wednesday, a move widely seen as likely to further limit the independence of the Turkish news media.
Dogan Media Company, owned by Aydin Dogan, sold its media assets to Demiroren Holding, a conglomerate with interests primarily in energy, construction, tourism and media.
A representative of Demiroren Holding, speaking on the condition of anonymity, confirmed the sale to Reuters but did not disclose the price. A pro-government Turkish newspaper, The Daily Sabah, put the value of the transaction at about $1.2 billion.
The Dogan Media group owned the newspapers Hurriyet and Posta, and two of Turkey’s main entertainment and news channels, Kanal D and CNN Turk. The government had accused the company of being biased against it and the governing party.
In 2009, the company was fined $2.5 billion for unpaid taxes, a decision widely seen as an attempt by the Turkish government to punish it for its criticism of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, then the prime minister and now the president.
After the fine, Mr. Dogan was forced to sell two of the group’s newspapers to Demiroren.
In 2014, in a leaked phone conversation between Erdogan Demiroren, the owner of Demiroren Holding, and Mr. Erdogan, Mr. Demiroren was heard apologizing for an article in the newspaper Milliyet.
“Did I upset you, boss?” Mr. Demiroren was heard to say, as Mr. Erdogan rebuked him for an article on the leaked minutes of a secret meeting between Turkish intelligence officers and leaders of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party, also known as the P.K.K. Mr. Demiroren was heard weeping, promising Mr. Erdogan that he would find the source of the leaked minutes.
“The process of gathering the Turkish media industry in one hand according to the Putin model is completed,” Kadri Gursel, a veteran journalist, wrote in a Twitter post about the sale. Mr. Gursel was released last year after 11 months in jail but still faces prosecution after being accused of aiding a terrorist organization, a charge he denied.
“By this huge takeover including Hurriyet, Turkish mass media industry comes under the direct political control of President Erdogan,” he said in his tweet.
More journalists are being held in detention in Turkey than in any other country in the world, according to Committee to Protect Journalists. A local group, the Turkish Journalists Association, said that 154 journalists were in jail as of January.
Cem Kucuk, a pro-government commentator and social media activist known for his online harassment of journalists who are critical of the government, congratulated Mr. Dogan over Twitter.
He said journalists loyal to Mr. Erdogan working at the Dogan Media Company could feel “at ease.”
The Turkish media will now experience a “time of peace,” he said.
